From: TTU::HLB9536      "HEATHER BAILEY" 19-MAR-1999 10:42:15.93
To:   @JOURNAL
CC:
Subj: J: goo-goo dolls

this seemed to be sort of an odd mentor assignment: goo-goo dolls. but
this is actually very appropriate to my life. the first half of the
lyric is something that i've been screaming about for pretty much my
entire life. i always seemed so different from everyone around me. i
thought about things that other people didnt think about. i felt
things that other people didn't. i wanted things in life that other
people didn't even consider or were interested in. i was always asking
questions; always looking for the deeper meaning or higher truth.
looking for somethign that was more real than what was there on the
surface. i wanted to "know."

i hold the things that i value so closely to me. so many things about
my little world are just vitally important to me. i don't like to have
them tromped on. it's like they tremble with beauty and it's cruel to
have others laugh at them or ignore them and miss such fragile, and
gentle beauty. so i hide them...sometimes even from myself.

i've been searching for many things in my life. i have this
drive...this pull...to go for high ideals, abstract beauty, living
life in a far out way. and i've also been searching for someone with
whom i can really share this. beauty seems smaller and paler when i'm
the only person who sees it.

i've found a couple of people along the way that really do understand
some of these things. i remember that it was such a relieving shock
when james first told me, "i understand." i'd finally started spilling
stuff out and was tired of holding in the hurt of no one
understanding. and he understood. when he said that i felt it. i mean,
really *felt* it. and it was like a lightning bolt had hit me and
rocked me to my core. and i wasn't alone there anymore. that's a
memory that i really treasure.

this is something that's been sort of a friction point between me and
mark, too. he doesn't understand what it is that i'm trying to share a
lot of the time. and i don't really understand him. instead of giving
up a lot of times, we still try to communicate these things to each
other. but we don't connect like we used to.

to move this out further, when i'm in groups, it's much the same. it
seems like i'm rarely able to connect with people about where i'm
coming from. i'm taking a different path from what most people are
taking -- even in mentor.

for my path to be labelled as fringe by the general public is to be
expected, but for it to be fringe in mentor as well.... it's kind of
like that guy getting kicked out of guns and roses for doing too many
drugs. when you're considered odd by a group of eccentric people,
where doesn't that leave you?

i go through spurts of trying to share this with people because i feel
lonely or like i'm about to burst and just have to get it out (one
being a pulling in need and the other being a pushing out need). and i
start to feel lower and lower as i'm pushed further and further away.
that's mostly brought on by my old low self esteem stuff. i feel
outside of people -- like i'm not part of the circle. i feel cut off
and adrift.

lately i've found that david understands a lot of who i am and what i
care about. and i understand him. we're not going down the same road
and those differences are noticable, but it's nice to at least have
someone within shouting distance. there's marching to the beat of a
different drummer and then there's being so far out that you're the
only drummer there.

i really love that each time i find someone that understands, it's
always such a shock. i'm surprised and over-joyed. it's very special.

"When everythings meant to be broken
I just want you to know who I am."

i've felt pretty broken this past year. in sharing my most treasured
things, they got broken. the more i think about it, the more i think
that's the way it's supposed to be. if you hold them in the vault of
your heart, how can you grow? where's the room for change? those deep
core parts of myself got trashed. i finally got the courage to open
that stuff up and then the storm came in (frequently called life). but
the destruction isn't the end of the world. it's a different beginning
though. not one that i had expected and i struggled for a long time to
let go of something that was dead and couldn't be brought back to
life. i took a long time to go through my death throws. there's still
remaining sorrow and anger at james, at the world, at life, at myself.
but it's not consuming me anymore. the guest came and cleaned my
house. now i'm sort of starting fresh.

this has gotten me to thinking that maybe those things that i hold so
tightly and value so much have times when i need to give them up or
give them room to move and change. so when it's time for them to be
broken, i open them up for others to step on and break. and i think
that it takes me really trusting and loving someone for them to be
able to really break me. sometimes i feel called to do that. but i
can't see that being a perpetual state. these things are meant to be
broken which is why i open up. it's what i'm unconsciously intending
to do. or what i'm being called to let happen.

one of my greatest desires is for someone to know who i am. and i go
through this different ways at different times. i look for people to
know different parts of me. i've given up expecting someone to connect
to every part of me. the differences that i get from others sharing
with me is so much more valuable to me than just communicating what i
already have or am working on. it makes me more. and i love that. i
remember a time where i really wanted to have a twin so that there
would be at least one other people like me. but i'm celebrating the
differences now. but i still want some areas of connection. being
alienated hurts. but finding something new is exciting.

love
heather


             =+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=
              The miracle is not that we do this work, but that
              we are happy to do it.      -Mother Teresa
             =+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=

