<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/MathML2/dtd/xhtml-math11-f.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Cognition and Rational Modeling</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../styles/assignment.css" />
    <style type="text/css">
    </style>
    <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script type="text/javascript">
      _uacct = "UA-939849-1";
      urchinTracker();
    </script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="header">
      <h1>Cognition and Rational Modeling</h1>
    </div>
    <ul>
      <li>Evolutionary psychology:
      <ul>
        <li>There's a limited quantity of resources in the world.</li>
        <li>Organisms are competing for those resources.</li>
        <li>The dominance of an organism in an environment is a function of its capacity to reproduce.</li>
        <li>An organism's capacity to reproduce is in part a function of its capacity to survive.</li>
        <li>An organism's capacity to survive is a function of both its physical and behavioral characteristics.</li>
        <li>The brain is a crucial survival tool controlling an individual's behavior.</li>
        <li>Humans more than any other organism dominate through their mental prowess as much as their physical capabilities.</li>
      </ul>
      </li>
      <li>Limited attention:
      <ul>
        <li>Humans have a limited attentional capacity.</li>
        <li>Attention may be divided among multiple concerns but with an eventual detriment to performance.</li>
        <li>In order to operate more efficiently, human reasoning operates in terms of associating characteristics to recognized patterns.</li>
        <li>There are several intermediate steps between cause and effect in human behavior, specifically:
        <ol>
          <li>Reality &mdash; There's a whole bunch of stuff that's happening. Light being emitted and reflected, air currents, chemical processes, etc.</li>
          <li>Sensing &mdash; Sense organs are stimulated according to their receptors. Raw sensory data is pouring in.</li>
          <li>Abstraction &mdash; Sounds are composed into words, sights into objects, etc. I see a bottle and a book &mdash; objects with expected properties and behaviors &mdash; rather than simply colors.</li>
          <li>Perception &mdash; Of all the sense abstractions available to perception, only a few are chosen as being important. The hum of the air conditioner and the speaker on my desk are given less attentional focus than the computer monitor.</li>
          <li>Reasoning &mdash; The set of perceptions is combined in the mind and used to make decisions which will have an optimal survival benefit.</li>
          <li>Action &mdash; Some concrete behavior is performed.</li>
        </ol>
        </li>
        <li>These levels are neither discrete nor independent nor function statically.</li>
        <li>Abstraction, perception and reasoning provide feedback to each other.</li>
        <li>An abstraction is a fuzzy set defined by a pattern of some salient characteristics. There's a bottle, sandwich box and ball on my desk. The bottle is 100% a bottle. The sandwich box is something like a bottle with a really wide top. The ball is very little like a bottle.</li>
        <li>The reasoned survival benefit may be for the individual, the family, the society, the species, all life, all being.</li>
      </ul>
      </li>
      <li>Cognitive models:
      <ul>
        <li>The reasoning component of the process has several influences:
        <ul>
          <li>Autonomic responses such as heightened alertness in response to a loud noise.</li>
          <li>Conditioned responses such as a fear of heights.</li>
          <li>Conscious rational processing such as flushing the toilet.</li>
        </ul>
        </li>
        <li>Identity is another term for the conglomeration of rational models used in rational processing.</li>
        <li>The "subconscious mind" is a metaphor for the non-rational components of the process.</li>
        <li>Responses can be conditioned on complex patterns that are not rationally apparent, particularly if those patterns do not fit with the accepted identity.</li>
        <li>The rational models are defined in terms of abstractions similar to and intersecting the set of abstractions used in perception.</li>
      </ul>
      </li>
      <li>Objectification of cognition:
      <ul>
        <li>Conditioned and autonomic responses are subject to change to a certain extent.</li>
        <li>This change comes through further conditioning.</li>
        <li>Abstractions are refined through a process of making predictions of an outcome based on a model.</li>
        <li>The process is faster through an assignment of rational abstractions to the non-rational impulses.</li>
        <li>Feedback from a predicted behavior becomes explicit in addressing reconditioning.</li>
      </ul>
      </li>
    </ul>

    <hr />

    <ul>
      <li>Psychology is the study of how the methods employed by the brain affect the organism and its environment including its society</li>
    </ul>
  </body>
</html>
