<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC
  "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title></title>
    <script type="application/javascript"><![CDATA[
    ]]></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>The Holographic God Proposition</h1>
    <h2></h2>

    <blockquote>
      <p>False prophets don't mean prophecy is true.</p>
    </blockquote>

    <blockquote>
      <p>They also don't mean it's false.</p>
    </blockquote>
    
    <section>
      <h1></h1>

      <p>The holographic god proposition has been the idea that keeps me from calmly rejoining the human race. I can hold engaging and largely coherent discussions on a variety of topics, but when I realize I've hit a tangent that connects to the holographic god, it all falls apart. There's no quicker way to end a conversation than to start talking about "end times."</p>

      <p>If you take a hologram and cut it in half, you end up with two smaller identical holograms, each less distinct than the original. Life is demonstrably like this. I am a superorganism. I am made of muscles and organs which which can be kept alive independent of "me." Those are, in turn made up of cells &mdash; smaller, less sophistocated units of life.</p>

      <p>The divisions continue down inside the cell, but what interests me is the other direction. We have a consciousness that exists at a particular level of organization. We have no direct experience of either up or down the complexity scale. I am no more capable of understanding God than one of my brain cells is of comprehending me. It's not a matter of worth or metaphysics &mdash; simply a matter of scale.</p>
      
      <p>Where things get strange is the proposition that consciousness could traverse the levels of organization. Also that perhaps the experience of time that we have is particular to our level of organization. Perhaps some scales experience time like the Traflamadorian's in <cite>Slaughterhouse V</cite>:</p>

      <blockquote>
        <p>All moments, past, present and future, always have existed, always will exist. The Tralfamadorians can look at all the different moments just that way we can look at a stretch of the Rocky Mountains, for instance. They can see how permanent all the moments are, and they can look at any moment that interests them. It is just an illusion we have here on Earth that one moment follows another one, like beads on a string, and that once a moment is gone it is gone forever.</p>
        <p>When a Tralfamadorian sees a corpse, all he thinks is that the dead person is in a bad condition in that particular moment, but that the same person is just fine in plenty of other moments. Now, when I myself hear that somebody is dead, I simply shrug and say what the Tralfamadorians say about dead people, which is 'so it goes.'</p>
      </blockquote>

      <p>Perhaps prophets are people who slip for periods into seeing across time. They can't completely codify their experience and you end up with descriptions of visions. They would necessarily be unable to describe anything with enough precision to prevent it from happening.</p>

      <p>This is what scares me the most. The idea that we're on a path and it is only my limited perspective that causes me to feel revulsion at the idea of the population dying or poisoning the seas.</p>

      <p>It was the line about the seas that has really set me off again. I began thinking about this because in the Book of Revelations, the anti-Christ assigns numbers to all the commercants. That's part of how I envision the economy operating. Though I'm moving away from creating new identifiers, I'm just taking the identifiers that people have already taken and making them useful.</p>

      <p>Now BP has poked a hole they can't plug in the bottom of the ocean. Everyone "knows" that they'll fix this and it isn't so bad, except it's in the future so no one really knows any better than I do &mdash; consensus does not generate reality despite how we act.</p> 

      <p>A person can have self-knowledge &mdash; awareness of their skills and interests &mdash; without having an image that they are maintaining of themselves or trying to encourage other people to have of them.</p>

      <p>Identity provides a trust mechanism. In the economy I envision, a person can have multiple disconnected identites, but certain social interactions require a verifiable identity. I could have a carpenter persona 

      <ul>
        <li><a href=""></a></li>
      </ul>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>
