This is not at all on the humorous side.
What does COCAINE mean to YOU?
    
I believed that I was doing my part in the war on drugs by just not
using and sending contributions to those who are directly involved,
This is the story my sister told me that changed my mind and hopefully
it  will yours also, we have to do more, please send this E-mail to as 
many people as you can, if you have a home PC send it out there to.
     
My sisters co-worker had a sister in Texas who, with her husband was 
planning a weekend trip across the border for a shopping spree, at the 
last minute their baby sitter canceled so they were stuck taking their 
two year old son with them. They had been across the border for about an 
hour when the baby got free and ran around a corner, the mother went 
chasing but he had disappeared, the mother went to find a police officer 
who told her to go directly to the border gate and wait, not really 
understanding she did as she was instructed.
     
About 45 minutes later a man approached the border carrying the boy, the 
mother ran to him grateful he had been found, when the man realized it 
was the boys mother he dropped the boy and ran himself, the police were 
waiting for him and got him.
     
The boy, dead, in the 45 minutes he was missing, was cut open, ALL of
his insides removed and his body cavity stuffed with COCAINE. The man
was going to carry him across the border as if he were asleep.
     
A two year old boy, dead, discarded as if he were a piece of trash for 
somebody's cocaine.
     
If this story can get out and change one persons mind about what drugs 
mean to them, we are helping, lets hope and pray it changes a lot of 
minds.
