A hip young man goes out and buys a 1997 Ferrari GTO. It is the best
and most expensive car available in the world, costing about $500,000.
He takes it out for a spin and while stopping for a red light, an old
man on a moped (both looking about 90 years old) pulls up next to him.
The old man looks over the sleek, shiny surface of the car and asks,

"What kind of car ya' got there, sonny?"

The young man replies, "A 1997 Ferrari GTO. They cost about a half
million dollars!"

"That's a lot of money," says the old man, shocked. "Why does it cost
so much?"

"Because this car can do up to 320 miles an hour!" states the cool
dude proudly.

The moped driver asks, "Can I take a look inside?"

"Sure," replies the owner.

So the old man pokes his head in the window and looks around. Leaning
back on his moped, the old man says, "That's a pretty nice car, all
right!"

Just then the light changes so the guy decides to show the old man
what his car can do. He floors it, and within 30 seconds the
speedometer reads 320 mph. Suddenly, he notices a dot in his rear view 
mirror. It seems to be getting closer!

He slows down to see what it could be and suddenly, whhhoooossshhh!
Something whips by him, going much faster! "What on earth could be
going faster than my Ferrari?!" the young man asks himself.

Then, ahead of him, he sees a dot cooming toward him. Whoooooosh! It
goes by again, heading the opposite direction! And it almost looked
like the old man on the moped!

"Couldn't be," thinks the guy. "How could a moped outrun a Ferrari?!"
Again, he sees a dot in his rear view mirror! Whooooosh Ka-BbblaMMM!

It plows into the back of his car, demolishing the rear end. The young
man jumps out, and it IS the old man!!! Of course, the moped and the
old man are hurtin' for certain. He runs up to the dying old man and
says, "You're badly hurt! Is there anything I can do for you?"

The old man moans and replies, "Yes, Unhook my suspenders from your
side-view mirror!"
