If you love someone, tell them.


Remember always to say what you mean. Never be afraid to express
yourself. Take this opportunity to tell someone what they mean to you.
Seize the day and have no regrets. Most importantly, stay close to
your friends and family, for they have helped make you the person that
you are today and are what it's all about anyway. Pass this along to
your friends. Let it make a difference in your day and theirs. The
difference between expressing love and having regrets is that the
regrets may stay around forever.


Within 1 hour you must send it to other people. Within five days you
will have a miraculous occurrence in your relationships. You will find
new love or have an old love rekindled.


If you do not send it, you will have once again passed up the
opportunity to do something loving and beautiful and continue the
trend that gives you problems in your relationships. If you've
received this it is because someone cares for you and it means there
is probably at least someone for whom you care. If you're too busy to
take the few minutes that it would take right now to forward this to
ten people, would it be the first time you didn't or that little thing
that would make a difference in your relationships? And the better
you'll get at reaching out to those you care about. Here's the deal:
Forward this letter to at least 10 different people; within 1 hour of
receiving it. people who care for you, and that warm glowy feeling
that comes from loving others.
