   Madalyn Murry O'Hair, an atheist, whose effort successfully
eliminated the use of the Bible Reading and Prayer from public
schools fifteen years ago has now been granted a Federal hearing in
Washington, D.C. on the same subject by the Federal Communications
Commission(FCC).  Her petition, P.M. 2493 would ultimately pave the
way to stop the reading of the Gospel on the air waves of America.
She took her petition with 287,00 signatures to back her stand.  If
her attempt is successful, all Sunday worship services being
broadcast, either by radio, or television will stop.  Many elderly
people and shut-ins as well as those recuperating from
hospitalization or illness, depend on radio and television to fulfill 
their worship needs every week.
     Madalyn is also campaigning to REMOVE ALL CHRISTMAS PROGRAMS, 
CHRISTIAN SONGS, AND CHRISTMAS CAROLS from public schools.
You can help this time!  We need 1,000,000 (one million) signed
letters.  This should defeat Ms. O'Hair and show that there are many
CHRISTIANS ALIVE AND WELL AND CONCERNED in our country.  This
petition is NUMBER 2493.  Sign, cut off and mail the form below.
PLEASE DO NOT SIGN JOINTLY AS Mr. and Mrs.  Let each adult SIGN ONE
separately and mail it in a separate envelope.  BE SURE TO PUT
PETITION NUMBER 2493 ON THE ENVELOPE when mailing your letter.

Please send this letter out to anyone that can help in the cause.


________________________________________________________________________


Federal Communications Commission               RE: PETITION NO. 2493
1919 "H" Street
DATE:________
Washington, D.C. 20054

Gentlemen:
      I am an American and proud of my heritage.  I am also very much
aware of the place religious faith has played in the freedom we as
Americans now enjoy.  Therefore, I protest any human effort to remove
from radio and television any programs designed to show faith in GOD
or a SUPREME BEING or to remove CHRISTMAS SONGS, CHRISTMAS PROGRAMS,
AND CHRISTMAS CAROLS from Public Air Waves, Schools, or Office
Buildings.

Sincerely,

SIGNATURE:_________________________

NAME:______________________________

ADDRESS:___________________________

        ___________________________

 COPY THIS MESSAGE TO A HALF A DOZEN OF YOUR CLOSEST FRIENDS ON THE
 INTERNET, SO THEY CAN JOIN THE GROUP!!
