<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC
 "+//ISBN 0-9673008-1-9//DTD OEB 1.0.1 Document//EN"
 "http://openebook.org/dtds/oeb-1.0.1/oebdoc101.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta name="author" content="Bernhard Ribbeck"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="style/book.css" type="text/css"/>
<title>A Blue and Cloudless Sky</title>
</head>
<body id="ch13">
<a id="page275"></a>
<h1>A Blue and Cloudless Sky</h1>
<h2>by Bernhard Ribbeck</h2>
<h3 class="italic">Translated from the Danish by Niels Dalgaard</h3>

<p class="noindent"><i><q>Bernhard Ribbeck</q> is the writing name of Palle Juul Holm. Holm has had a long career as a teacher of Danish, German, and psychology at the equivalent of high-school level. Meanwhile, in addition to his fiction, he has written art criticism, book reviews, and lyrics for the now-defunct rock group, The Live Museum. His collection, <cite>Isen mellem &#248;erne</cite> [<cite>The Ice Between the Islands</cite>], appeared in 1999.</i></p>

<p><i><q>A Blue and Cloudless Sky,</q> in its first appearance in English, was published in James and Kathryn Morrow&#8217;s <cite>The SFWA European Hall of Fame</cite>, in 2007. For determined readers, you may seek out the poem <q>Walking Song</q> by the Japanese poet Tar&#244; Yamamoto, reprinted in English by the Morrows, as a source of some of the imagery in this story. James Morrow calls the story <q>a <i>tour de force</i> time-travel tale that manages to be at once rigorously plotted and emotionally resonant.</q> We agree.</i></p>
<a id="page276"></a>

<hr/>

<h3>1</h3>

<p class="first"><span class="first-letter">W</span>hat do we know, what do we really know about anything? I wonder and stare at Fausto, who&#8217;s driving the tractor-trailer west through the cold of early evening, first across the lush farmland, then over a dry vacant plateau, and finally up through the mountain passes along the border.</p>

<p><q>Do <i>you</i> believe this is the end of Nakorza, the end of us all?</q> he asks.</p>

<p>What can I say? That maybe it is, but not just yet? That I at least shall escape and make it back to Earth? Because if I don&#8217;t, there never will have been a Fausto Caiazzo, or any other member of his species, on Nakorza.</p>

<p>There will only have been the aborigines.</p>

<p>We&#8217;re climbing rapidly, following one hairpin turn after another. Behind the mountain peaks hang clouds the color of bruises, and on the straight stretches Fausto drives as if he doesn&#8217;t care whether the end comes now or in six months.</p>

<p>We take a sharp curve where dark grimy ice lies like charred food in the bottom of a pan, and the whole truck skids. Fausto straightens us out, but the trailer swings from side to side; I cringe and hold my breath, then look down the ravine at the river with its frozen banks, and wonder what will happen if we go over the edge and crash.</p>

<p>Will everything disappear?</p>

<p>Yes, I suppose it will.</p>

<p>And I ask myself: Might that be for the best?</p>
<a id="page277"></a>
<p><q>I don&#8217;t know,</q> I tell Fausto. <q>Maybe this is the end&#8212;at least the end of what we know.</q> The shocking idea makes my voice sound thin and ethereal.</p>

<p><q>Shit,</q> Fausto mutters harshly. I smell his adrenaline-laced sweat, along with the cab&#8217;s permanent stench of motor oil and tobacco, joined now by the fine bitter fragrance of winter air blowing through the crack in my window.</p>

<p>There&#8217;s really not much I can say to Fausto&#8217;s despair, so I keep my eyes on the mountains, and when at last he breaks the silence, his voice is softer, almost apologetic. He tells me he&#8217;s not out to kill us, but we&#8217;re running late and liable to get stuck in the pass if it begins to snow, and he won&#8217;t feel safe until we&#8217;re in Powyrnisch.</p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> I say, nothing more. I wish I could be better company, but I&#8217;m in no mood to talk, and I don&#8217;t want to distract him from his driving.</p>

<p>Fausto coughs. <q>It&#8217;s damn cold for Easter week,</q> he observes. <q>And Easter isn&#8217;t even early this year.</q></p>

<p><q>The coldest Easter ever,</q> I say, hoping the conversation will end there.</p>

<p><q>A frigid Easter, that&#8217;s wrong,</q> Fausto says and sticks a cigarette in his mouth. I light it for him. <q>Is there a connection, I wonder?</q></p>

<p><q>It&#8217;s probably a coincidence. But I&#8217;m no expert. They say everything&#8217;s connected in some way. Or it&#8217;s the will of God. Or something.</q></p>

<p>We approach a steep rise. Fausto shifts into first gear, and the truck crawls slowly upward; in some places the wheels spin on the ice ridges, taking us nowhere, and the whole rig threatens to slide down the mountain. My chest tightens.</p>

<p><q>Know what I think?</q> Fausto asks.</p>

<p>I realize he&#8217;s talking to stay awake, so I decide to sound interested. <q>No, what do you think?</q></p>

<p>Nakorza&#8217;s sun, let&#8217;s call it the sun, has disappeared behind the peaks, and a mass of snow-laden clouds has reached this side of the border. Fausto switches on the high beams.</p>

<p><q>I think he must be here on Nakorza right now, in some village or other, close at hand, but nobody knows who he is,</q> he says. <q>They say that all of us are here&#8212;not the Piouli, of <a id="page278"></a>course, but everybody else&#8212;we&#8217;re here because of him, the space traveler. We all came to Nakorza from another part of the galaxy.</q></p>

<p>Fausto signals that he&#8217;d like some broth. Removing the cup from its holder, I push it into the zarf, then fill it from the thermos, clumsily, fearfully. I try to draw solace from the melancholy glow of the dashboard as it illuminates the cab.</p>

<p><q>Not only are we from somewhere out there in space,</q> Fausto continues, taking a sip of the scalding soup, <q>we&#8217;re from some distant point in the future too. What&#8217;s a person to believe?</q></p>

<p>(Well, what <i>is</i> a person to believe?)</p>

<p>Obviously he wants to pursue this idea. He can&#8217;t imagine how often I&#8217;ve run the story through my mind, but it&#8217;s best to let him ramble on. So I sit and listen as Fausto tells how, once upon a time, a wanderer from the planet of our origins came to Nakorza in a capsule. Somehow he made it back to his own world, where he told the sages about Nakorza. Several centuries later&#8212;in a future that still lies ahead for Fausto and myself and everyone else&#8212;the sages&#8217; descendants learned to move effortlessly across the barriers of distance and circumstance, and so they launched hundreds of ships to Nakorza, each filled with a band of colonists: our ancestors.</p>

<p><q>Our ancestors&#8230;who aren&#8217;t yet born.</q> Fausto takes a final swallow of soup, frees it from the zarf, and replaces the cup in the holder.</p>

<p>Not yet born. Because the sages didn&#8217;t simply send the colonists through space&#8212;they also sent them back in time, far back, to a moment that existed 350 years before the space traveler returned to the planet of our origins. Why did the sages feel compelled to do that? The records aren&#8217;t clear, but their decision was evidently connected to the traveler&#8217;s accounts of the lifeforms he&#8217;d found on the faraway planet: he&#8217;d discovered the Piouli, of course, and also&#8230;us.</p>

<p><q>It all depended on the woman&#8212;the Nakorzan who the traveler brought back to his home world,</q> Fausto says. <q>She was the one who knew Nakorza&#8217;s coordinates. She <a id="page279"></a>was the one who enabled our species to find the planet a second time.</q></p>

<p><q>Or the first time, if you will.</q></p>

<p><q>Or the first time,</q> Fausto echoes.</p>

<p>Huge snowflakes sift down through the glare from our high beams. The cold begins to penetrate the cab.</p>

<p><q>We don&#8217;t even know the traveler&#8217;s name,</q> Fausto says. <q>Apparently the sages had their reasons for keeping it secret.</q></p>

<p><q>In hundreds of years from now they will have their reasons,</q> I correct him.</p>

<p><q>But we know the woman&#8217;s name,</q> Fausto says irritably. <q>Maria.</q></p>

<p>(Where is Maria?)</p>

<p>I can hear Fausto breathing deeply and calmly. <q>If you read the old books,</q> he says, <q>you&#8217;ll see that the world our traveler described in such detail is the very world that Nakorza has become. That&#8217;s why I think the moment of our discovery is at hand&#8212;that&#8217;s why I think he walks among us now. But nobody can identify him, and nobody ever will, except for Maria. He could be anybody. He could be me. Or you.</q></p>

<p>(Yes.)</p>

<p><q>Something puzzles me,</q> Fausto continues. <q>When the traveler returned home, why didn&#8217;t he tell the sages about the Crown of Stars? He must&#8217;ve seen it. Or if he told them, why would the sages&#8217; descendants send the colonists here? How could they do such a thing, knowing that not only Nakorza but this entire sector of the galaxy would eventually be annihilated? Something doesn&#8217;t fit.</q></p>

<p>He shakes his head in sadness and confusion. And he&#8217;s right. Something doesn&#8217;t fit.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">It&#8217;s snowing heavily now, and I&#8217;m relieved to see that the next part of the pass runs through a tunnel. We enter the frigid darkness; the road is clear, and we feel happy knowing that, for a few minutes at least, we&#8217;ll be protected from avalanches and drifts, and we won&#8217;t have to worry about tumbling over the cliff.</p>
<a id="page280"></a>
<p>The lamps in the tunnel ceiling are all broken. <q>When you see this kind of crap,</q> Fausto says, <q>it&#8217;s hard to believe our forefathers were able to leap through space and time.</q></p>

<p>We emerge into a nightmare: a towering wall of blinding snow, plus a fierce wind that makes the trailer sway and almost forces us off the road. Ten kilometers beyond the tunnel a white sign looms out of the blizzard&#8212;it bears the symbol of the region, two black crossed arrows&#8212;and Fausto almost crashes into it. <span class="small-caps">ST. FANURIUS</span>, the sign informs the wayfarer in Gothic type. <span class="small-caps">KREIS STEFANOPEL/STEPANOPOL. GLIEDSTAAT NEU-RUTHENIEN</span>. 2410 <span class="small-caps">M.&#220;. MEERESH&#214;HE</span>.</p>

<p>The official language of New Ruthenia is German, though most of the inhabitants, at least on this side of the Kolpa River and south of the lower Brenda, are an undefined mixture of Eastern Europeans and people from the Balkans, speaking their own amalgamated tongue.</p>

<p><q>Look out, dammit!</q> I cry as we rush past the sign, missing it by centimeters.</p>

<p>Fausto stops the truck, shifts into neutral, and turns toward me, veins bulging at his temples. <q>Shut the fuck up, Gerold,</q> he bellows, <q>or you&#8217;ll walk to Powyrnisch!</q> He slams a fist into the dashboard, sending the Holy Virgin jumping, then grinds into first again and starts to bring us slowly into the river valley.</p>

<p>On this side of the mountain we&#8217;re a good distance from the cliff, but it&#8217;s still a treacherous drive, the road twisting madly, the horrifying storm roaring all around us. The hairpin turns are almost impossible to see, the gusts make it difficult to negotiate the curves, and I don&#8217;t like to think what will happen if a snowplow appears in our path.</p>

<p>We say nothing. Sitting with eyes half closed, I try to concentrate on something besides our terrifying descent. I think of Saint Fanurius, the patron of all those who seek something they&#8217;ve lost (does one need any other saint?), and of the unseasonable cold. Maybe Fausto is right. Maybe there&#8217;s a connection between this frigid weather and the Crown of Stars. Could the Crown have pulled Nakorza into a different orbit?</p>

<p>Back in San Silvestro they probably know the answer. And I hope they have the sense to keep it to themselves.</p>
<a id="page281"></a>
<br/>

<p class="noindent">As we drop below the timberline, I&#8217;m able to open my eyes and unclench my sweaty fists; the saliva returns to my mouth, and I stop breathing in gasps.</p>

<p>The broad trees catch the brunt of the storm, the straight stretches are longer now, and the snow lies in a smooth pure layer on the road. Fausto relaxes, lifts a hand from the wheel, and manages to retrieve a fresh cigarette and light it by himself.</p>

<p><i><q>Scusi!</q></i> he says and tosses me the pack.</p>

<p><i><q>Di niente!</q></i> I light a cigarette and draw the smoke deep into my lungs, and for an instant I stop thinking of what will happen to Nakorza if the truck crashes and we die. I also push aside the nagging possibility that I&#8217;m not the person I think I am: there may be another on Nakorza who is in fact the one who will return.</p>

<p>Now the sound arrives, the shriek of the storm in the tall evergreens that the Piouli call <i>kadua</i> and the New Ruthenians gypsy spruce, trees that release a mournful song when the wind blows through their large tubular needles.</p>

<p><q>Twelve kilometers to Powyrnisch.</q> Fausto allows himself to take his eyes off the road and look at me inquisitively. <q>Has your friend invited you to stay over Easter?</q></p>

<p>I nod. <q>I&#8217;m hoping that Monday morning you can pick me up in Powyrnisch, on your way back to San Silvestro. Why?</q></p>

<p><q>Rumors,</q> he says and stares straight ahead. An unfamiliar animal dashes across the road where the high beams fall away.</p>

<p><q>What sort of rumors?</q> I ask, as he knows I will.</p>

<p><q>This job of mine has me delivering goods in the forest country up north, Reichart&#8217;s Notch and thereabouts, small isolated villages where nothing much happens. The folks there are a little primitive, you know, lumberjack types, coal miners, but decent. Our kind of people, if you follow my meaning&#8212;Catholics, Anglicans, and Methodists, most of them&#8212;and they speak a language you can understand.</q></p>

<p><q>So this rumor comes from your drinking buddies in Reichart&#8217;s Notch?</q></p>
<a id="page282"></a>
<p><q>Most of the time, they&#8217;re pretty bored,</q> Fausto says. <q>Maybe that&#8217;s why they gossip.</q></p>

<p><q>About&#8230;?</q></p>

<p><q>About things that are supposed to happen</q>&#8212;he gives me a quick glance&#8212;<q>in Stepanopol during the Feast of the Resurrection.</q></p>

<p>Falling silent, he pilots us through a stretch of road unprotected by the trees. He switches off his high beams and concentrates on the snow, which appears to come from all sides at once. Soon we&#8217;re back in the forest again. Fausto rolls his side window partly down and tosses his cigarette butt into the blizzard. A gust of frigid air fills the cab, little prickly ice crystals, along with the keening of the gypsy spruces.</p>

<p><q>Deaths,</q> he says. <q>People have vanished, and the Stepanopol police aren&#8217;t looking into it too closely. It&#8217;s really difficult to prove anything. Strangers like you aren&#8217;t normally allowed at the Midnight Mass on Easter. But if your friend has invited you, I suppose there&#8217;s nothing to worry about. It&#8217;s all just idle talk anyway&#8212;I shouldn&#8217;t have mentioned it.</q></p>

<p>He sits mute for a while, bemused or angry, I can&#8217;t tell which.</p>

<p><q>Unless,</q> he adds, <q>your friend had a special reason for inviting you.</q></p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">We travel another seven kilometers, and now we&#8217;re so close to our destination that the squalls have acquired an apricot glow from the lights of Powyrnisch. Fausto pulls up at an inn, its tarred logs huddled beneath the towering <i>kaduas</i>.</p>

<p>Suddenly the snowplow we&#8217;d feared running into emerges from the blizzard, followed by an enormous gravel truck with a rotating searchlight atop its cab. Caught in the bright beam, two figures stand in the load bed, hurling shovelfuls of gravel over the tailgate and scattering it across the road. Sweat glistens on the parts of their faces visible between their fur caps and the wool scarves wrapped around their noses and mouths. Hunched over the auxiliary gas-powered generator that runs the huge truck&#8217;s engine, two other work<a id="page283"></a>ers warm themselves while waiting to relieve the gravel men. The huge vehicle passes so close to us that a spray of grit rattles against our wheels, but the workers don&#8217;t seem to notice, and an instant later the truck disappears into the dark forest, trailing the stench of coal tar.</p>

<p>As we stumble out of the cab, Faustino says, <q>This is Sofija&#8217;s place&#8212;let&#8217;s get warm,</q> and then he leads me through the drifts.</p>

<p>Reaching the front door, we stomp the snow off our boots. The porch is redolent of leather and lubricant and wet fur. Two pairs of cross-country skis lean against the rail. We step into the quiet inn. After the grinding engine and the wailing wind and the grieving trees, it seems as if I&#8217;ve become momentarily deaf.</p>

<p>Then we sit at a massive wooden table near the brick oven, and the sudden warmth and the smells of food cooking&#8212;I still haven&#8217;t learned the names of the local dishes&#8212;make me sleepy and relaxed, and I stretch my arms lazily and carelessly, so that my watch emerges from under my sleeve.</p>

<p><q>What time is it?</q> Fausto asks.</p>

<p>Had I thrown my watch away, a passerby might have found it and tried to represent himself as somebody he wasn&#8217;t. If I&#8217;d stuck the thing in my pocket or hidden it in a suitcase, customs officials and border police would have dug it out and asked questions. So until this moment I&#8217;d assumed that the least conspicuous way to carry the watch was on my wrist. But I wear it facedown&#8212;not so much because it says <span class="small-caps">SEIKO</span>, but because it has only twelve numerals.</p>

<p><q>My watch has stopped,</q> I tell Fausto.</p>

<p>He turns toward another table and addresses two young skiers as they drink from glazed earthenware mugs. He asks them a question, probably the same one he just asked me. They shrug.</p>

<p><i><q>Nam tschersornik,</q></i> one of them says and shows Fausto his bare wrist; but he looks at me as he speaks.</p>

<p>His eyes are gray and hostile and scared.</p>

<p><q>We can guess the approximate time,</q> Fausto says as the food is served by a white-haired woman whose clothes smell <a id="page284"></a>of smoke. <q>There&#8217;s a telephone here. If your friend leaves Stepanopol in fifteen minutes, he&#8217;ll reach Powyrnisch in an hour and a half. I&#8217;ll take you to meet him, but I don&#8217;t want to go any farther tonight&#8212;if Sofija&#8217;s got a free room, I&#8217;ll come back here and sleep.</q></p>

<p>Sour soup. Salty, spicy mutton that couldn&#8217;t possibly have come from a sheep. Beer with a strange, persistent aftertaste. Sofija sets two glazed mugs before us. <i><q>Tzujk!</q></i> she says, and pours us some fruit schnapps. I take a swallow. This stuff isn&#8217;t flavored with plums, and the bouquet includes a touch of almond and lily-of-the-valley, plus a stronger, stranger scent, as unexpected and emphatic as falling in love. No matter: the schnapps soon works the way it&#8217;s supposed to, burning off the chill along with my tension&#8212;and half my mucous membranes.</p>

<p>On the phone Gregor Tschuderka sounds enthusiastic but far away, and there&#8217;s a crackle and a whistling in my ear, as if something large and hungry is trying to devour the line, and yes, he&#8217;s looking forward to meeting me at the Powyrnisch train station <q>in ninety minutes.</q> I glance at my watch, shielding it with my body, and try to convert Nakorzan minutes into Seiko intervals.</p>

<p>As I return to the table, the cross-country skiers rise abruptly and start to leave, and one of them nods and mumbles a greeting in passing. But the gray-eyed skier pauses and stares at me, pale and tense, and he breathes heavily, so I can smell the schnapps on his breath, the flowers, the strange scent; he stands frozen to the bare plank floor, until his pal returns&#8212;<i><q>Chai, Damjan!</q></i>&#8212;and leads him toward the door.</p>

<p>A freezing draft blows into the room as the door opens and the two skiers exit, and I realize I&#8217;ve been fixed intently on Damjan, returning his stare.</p>

<p>He heard me make the phone call. Heard me say <i>Gregor Tschuderka.</i> Saw me glance at a watch that supposedly doesn&#8217;t work.</p>

<p><q>What was wrong with that guy?</q> I ask Fausto.</p>

<p><q>Wrong?</q> he echoes groggily. One of his eyes has slid to <a id="page285"></a>the side. He pulls himself together, focuses. <q>Oh, it&#8217;s just that you&#8217;re a stranger, but not a priest or a trucker, and people here aren&#8217;t used to strangers.</q> He gazes at the floor. <q>Especially not now.</q></p>

<p>He gestures at Sofija, who pours us more mugs of fruit schnapps, and I worry whether Fausto will be able to drive us safely down the last stretch of mountain road.</p>

<p>Sofija remains standing with a hand on Fausto&#8217;s shoulder and speaks directly to me. The only word I understand is the name <i>Damjan</i>.</p>

<p><q>Mama Sofija says not to worry about Damjan Kolarow,</q> Fausto obligingly translates. <q>He&#8217;s got a bad temper, but he&#8217;s a smart, honest boy. It&#8217;s just that he&#8217;s in love with a girl down in Stepanopol, and the thought of them dying together makes him despair.</q></p>

<p><q>Why must they die?</q> I ask.</p>

<p><q>The Crown,</q> Fausto replies.</p>

<p><q>But the scientists say it won&#8217;t swallow us,</q> I insist, as the paradoxes dance in my mind. <q>And the politicians say the same thing,</q> I add, but there&#8217;s no conviction in my tone.</p>

<p>Fausto sighs and takes from his pocket some folded, glossy pages, evidently a magazine clipping. <q>Forget the politicians. As for the scientists, they don&#8217;t know crap.</q> He lights a cigarette, his hands twitching. <q>Before my mother died, she had&#8212;a stroke, I think it&#8217;s called. Something happened in her head, so she was paralyzed on one side and had trouble talking. Seven years she sat in a wheelchair. Seven years. And in the mornings, it was mostly in the mornings, she would weep for hours, and she wouldn&#8217;t tell us why. Not that we really needed to ask, right? Isn&#8217;t it reason enough to be stuck in a wheelchair and have nothing to do but think about the person you used to be?</q></p>

<p>I don&#8217;t know what to say.</p>

<p><q>Sometimes I thought she was crying because of a dream she&#8217;d had the night before: her childhood home, meeting my father for the first time, us kids when we were little. But no, no,</q> Faustino says sardonically, unfolding the brightly colored pages, <q>science claims that when old people cry it has <a id="page286"></a>nothing to do with their dreams or their memories or their situation. It&#8217;s entirely</q>&#8212;he reads aloud from the illustrated article&#8212;<q><q>degeneration of the central nervous system.</q></q></p>

<p>He places the pages in my hands: a centerfold article, the flap offering two longitudinal sections of the human cerebrum, one showing a <q>young brain,</q> the other an <q>old brain,</q> with certain areas highlighted in red and blue.</p>

<p><q>Apparently it&#8217;s that simple.</q> Fausto points to the second illustration. <q>Too much blue makes old people weep.</q> He takes the article from my grasp and leans back in his chair. <q>No, I don&#8217;t much care for what the scientists tell me about my mother&#8212;and I&#8217;m not interested in what they say about the Crown of Stars either. We can all see it&#8217;s getting closer and closer, and the mouth is growing at a faster rate every day.</q></p>

<p>He lifts a finger past his nose and pretends to rub his eye. When he draws it away, the tip glistens wetly in the lamplight, and I wonder what a longitudinal section of his brain would look like.</p>

<p>The snow has stopped; but the wind is still fierce, and its howl suggests a band of lost children screaming in the treetops above the inn.</p>

<p><q>I understand your anger,</q> I tell Fausto, thinking of his mother as well as the Crown. <q>You have no reason to trust the scientists or the politicians. But their first duty, as they see it, is to prevent panic and anarchy, even if that means lying to us. As far as they&#8217;re concerned, the threat of social chaos is real: evidently there&#8217;s an ice age coming&#8212;crop failures, grain shortages&#8212;and things will get worse before they get better. We&#8217;ve already seen the first symptoms of barbarism. Lootings, wild orgies, mass suicides. What if this really <i>is</i> the end of Nakorza? Would you have the astronomers and the government admit it outright?</q></p>

<p>Fausto shakes his head slowly and throws up his hands. <q>But how can we accept their reassurances when we know they&#8217;re out to control us no matter what? Those doctors weren&#8217;t honest with my mother. <q>You&#8217;ll see, Signora Caiazzo,</q> they said. <q>You&#8217;ll live to be a hundred. You&#8217;ll survive us all.</q></q></p>

<p>If I were completely certain, I might tell him what I know; <a id="page287"></a>but I&#8217;m anxious and confused. The Crown of Stars simply shouldn&#8217;t be there.</p>

<p>I gulp down my schnapps and hold my breath so I won&#8217;t cough. <q>Anyway, I&#8217;m convinced that the Crown won&#8217;t engulf us or hit us or whatever it&#8217;s threatening to do.</q> Despite my efforts, I cough. <q>Maybe I&#8217;m deluding myself&#8212;a leap of faith to keep up my spirits. I have no strong evidence for my belief. But I wish, I really wish, I could get you to share it, Fausto.</q></p>

<p>For a long time we sit without speaking, listening to the sounds from the kitchen and the eerie grief of the spruce trees; and I think maybe it&#8217;s time to leave, so I slide my wrist under the table and glance at my watch.</p>

<p><q>Thanks,</q> Fausto says at last. <q>Actually, I think you could tell me a lot more if you wanted to. You might even shed some light on these mysteries.</q> He looks at me without blinking. <q>It&#8217;s just a feeling I&#8217;ve got, based on nothing.</q></p>

<p><q>What mysteries could I clear up?</q> I ask.</p>

<p><q>You might begin by explaining why you keep looking at a watch that has stopped.</q></p>

<p>A violent extra heartbeat. A sudden headache. A glowing dot inside my left eye. The iris aches, and I raise a hand as if I could bat the speck away.</p>

<p>Before I can answer Fausto, the phone rings. Sofija picks it up, listens, then glances at me and nods; she says something, nods again. As she hangs up, the bright speck fades, and Sofija speaks my name.</p>

<p><q>Gerold Schenna?</q> she inquires, and now it&#8217;s my turn to nod. <q>That was your friend Gregor, calling from the road,</q> she continues, translating through Fausto. <q>He&#8217;s been detained, but he&#8217;ll be in Powyrnisch in half an hour. And how small Nakorza is! Had Damjan known you&#8217;re on your way to visit Marja Tschuderka&#8217;s father, I&#8217;m sure he would&#8217;ve behaved better.</q></p>

<p>No, I think. If he&#8217;d known, he would&#8217;ve killed me. <q>I believe I could use another schnapps,</q> I say to Fausto.</p>

<p><q>Do we have time?</q> he asks, gesturing toward my wrist. I remove the Seiko and give it to him; he blanches around the mouth, and the dark blue of his eyes turns black.</p>
<a id="page288"></a>
<p><q>Now tell me,</q> he says.</p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> I say and wave at Sofija to bring us more schnapps.</p>

<p>And so I tell him.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">The snow still eddies along the road, forming small drifts; but the storm is nearly over, and the stars are coming out. It&#8217;s been a long time since anyone on Nakorza has wanted to look up and behold the sparkling heavens.</p>

<p>We are above Powyrnisch, close enough to see the dirty yellow light of the street lamps flickering through the swirling snow. On the railroad tracks below, a small switch engine shunts boxcars around, making up a freight train, the puffs of smoke and the clouds of steam mingling as they rise up the mountainside. Fine snow covers the coal in the tender like white flour.</p>

<p><q>That train isn&#8217;t going anywhere tonight,</q> Fausto says. <q>The line to Chidno runs through a gorge. There must be several meters of snow. God knows when it&#8217;ll be open again.</q></p>

<p><q>What about the way to Reichart&#8217;s Notch?</q> I ask.</p>

<p><q>Oh, I&#8217;ll get there all right,</q> Fausto says. <q>It&#8217;s a major highway, follows the course of the Kolpa; and once I&#8217;m in the town, I shouldn&#8217;t have any problem with the local streets. They&#8217;re pretty tough up in Reichart&#8217;s.</q></p>

<p>Snow whips across the windshield, and Fausto turns on the wipers. He steers us along one last curve, and we&#8217;re finally on level ground.</p>

<p><q>I&#8217;ll have a lot more trouble getting back to the inn,</q> he sighs, driving us across a wide parking lot between the freight yard and the station.</p>

<p>At the far end of the lot, our high beams catch a black Torrance sedan, parked with its lights out, motor running.</p>

<p><q>Looks like your friend is waiting for you,</q> Fausto says above the cry of the wind and the rumble of the truck&#8217;s engine.</p>

<p>Later, after he has pulled over and I&#8217;ve collected my rucksack, Fausto asks, <q>Is this good-bye, or will I see you again?</q></p>
<a id="page289"></a>
<p><q>When you&#8217;re safely back at Sofija&#8217;s place, call me at Gregor Tschuderka&#8217;s house.</q></p>

<p><q>I mean&#8212;do I survive?</q> he asks, his eyes following the windshield wipers.</p>

<p><q>One of us does,</q> I say, jumping out, <q>but I&#8217;m not sure who.</q></p>

<p>I move along the station platform, following the twin beams from Fausto&#8217;s truck. Suddenly a human figure lurches away from the driver&#8217;s door of the sedan, then glides across the parking lot on cross-country skis and vanishes down the slope. Now Gregor finally turns on his headlights, and the Torrance receives me as if I were a baton in a relay race. Fausto presses his horn, blaring a farewell, then drives off. His high beams sweep across a couple of black-tarred wooden buildings, a dancing plume of snow, and a fur-clad Piouli who has stopped to watch the tractor-trailer through shining yellow eyes.</p>

<p>Fausto disappears into the darkness.</p>

<p>The drifting snow blows straight into my eyes, but the large shape bearing its shadow toward me must be Gregor. We embrace and kiss each other on the cheek, and then I see behind him another shadow, smaller and less bulky, her hair escaping from her fur hat to flow in the freezing wind.</p>

<p>As Gregor steps to one side, the headlights illuminate his features. They are dogged and sad; he feels no joy at our reunion.</p>

<p><q>My daughter Marja,</q> her tells me, gesturing toward the young woman. He nods in my direction. <q>Marja, meet Gerold Schenna. It&#8217;s about time you got to know each other.</q></p>

<p class="chapterHeadC"><span class="bold"><i>2</i></span></p>

<p class="noindent"><q>I hope you didn&#8217;t freeze last night,</q> Gregor says. He sits with his back against the window. Behind him the daylight is a muted gray; a gentle morning snow is falling, and the wind has died down, though now and then a gust sweeps the loose snow off the roof and whirls it under the eaves.</p>

<p>The breakfast dishes have been cleared away, but the <a id="page290"></a>fragrance of sausage and sauerkraut still lingers. Mingled with the kitchen smells are hints of tallow and incense.</p>

<p><q>Thanks for asking,</q> I say. <q>No, my fireplace was still warm when I woke up.</q></p>

<p><q>You look tired,</q> he says.</p>

<p><q>I&#8217;ve rarely enjoyed such a soft, warm bed, but it&#8217;s always difficult to fall asleep in a new place.</q></p>

<p>He pulls his thick eyebrows together and busies himself in preparing his meerschaum pipe; he empties the bowl, fills it with slightly trembling hands, lights up&#8212;and all the while I look uncomfortably around the living room, jammed with knickknacks and rugs and icons. There&#8217;s a twentieth-generation copy of Rubljov&#8217;s <i>Trinity,</i> a Holy Virgin, sooty to the point of looking like a black smear on a gold background, and an original painting of Fanurius, rendered so the eyes follow you.</p>

<p>The saint looks down on me from the wall, and Gregor stares at me from the other side of the table. <q>Then you must have slept badly for the past several years,</q> he says.</p>

<p>He falls silent. And my friend and companion from our journey across the Turquoise Sea is suddenly a stranger.</p>

<p>A clock ticks loudly through the thirteen hours of Nakorza. The air is stagnant and smoky, making my eyes water. And, as when I spent my summer vacation visiting my wealthy school chums on the Kalmthal slopes, I feel the sting of being an outsider.</p>

<p><q>What do you really know?</q> I ask.</p>

<p><q>What do we really know about anything?</q> he replies, and I hear the echo of my thoughts from eighteen hours earlier.</p>

<p>He turns halfway around and lays a hand on the window, its panes frosted with blossoms of ice: the only flowers on Nakorza that look like the ones I knew as a child.</p>

<p><q>You once told me you grew up in Kaumea&#8212;after making sure I&#8217;d never been there&#8212;and naturally that would explain your strange accent and the gaps in your knowledge,</q> Gregor continues. <q>But eventually I realized you couldn&#8217;t identify even the most common animals and plants, neither here nor anywhere else on Nakorza.</q></p>
<a id="page291"></a>
<p><q>Maybe I slept through school,</q> I say feebly.</p>

<p><q>Don&#8217;t insult my intelligence. It wasn&#8217;t only the animals you didn&#8217;t know; you lacked all sorts of facts. You were ignorant of New Ruthenian history, of world history in general. Any child understands the rules of Kulaii, but not Gerold Schenna! You&#8217;d never heard of a <i>mosora</i>, and&#8230;</q> He throws up his hands. <q>Well, you were a pretty likely candidate for He-Who-Shall-Come. And the time is right, isn&#8217;t it? It can&#8217;t happen much later than now, if it&#8217;s going to happen at all.</q></p>

<p><q>Maybe he has already come and gone,</q> I say.</p>

<p>Gregor shakes his head. <q>Impossible. Don&#8217;t you suppose we&#8217;ve kept track of every Maria, Marja, Mary, Marie, Miriam, or Mirjam who ever lived on Nakorza? We can account for them all, my friend.</q></p>

<p>What a fate, I think, to be given that name and hence never escape official scrutiny.</p>

<p><q>And now you believe I&#8217;m He-Who-Shall-Come,</q> I say awkwardly, <q>and your daughter is the chosen Maria.</q></p>

<p><q>Time will tell,</q> he replies. <q>You know who you are.</q></p>

<p>He rises and takes a book from a shelf. It&#8217;s a thin volume with a stiff brown cover, printed on cheap yellow paper: <i>Die Offenbarungen und Prophezeiungen des heiligen Nikifor aus Chidno.</i></p>

<p><q>Here,</q> Gregor says, <q>you can read how the Prophet Nikifor has revealed that Nakorza&#8217;s destiny depends on what Mary decides during the Feast of the Resurrection.</q></p>

<p>Once again I&#8217;m bewildered by the literal-minded beliefs of these people. <q>But why in Stepanopol?</q> I object. <q>And why this Easter?</q></p>

<p><q>Because you&#8217;re here,</q> Gregor replies, leaning forward and pointing at me. He gestures toward the threatening sky. <q>And because this is the last opportunity. After tomorrow night, there won&#8217;t be any more resurrection feasts.</q></p>

<p>A gust of wind blows like a sigh along the road and echoes down the chimney. I glance at the firewood stacked for drying. The logs look like birch. The last woodpile?</p>

<p>From a deep, disorderly pocket inside my jacket I draw out a pack of cigarettes. I light one. The exotic tobacco is aromatic, but it doesn&#8217;t take the edge off my fear.</p>
<a id="page292"></a>
<p><q>You shouldn&#8217;t have invited me,</q> I say.</p>

<p>Gregor inhales deeply. <q>There was a time when I actually <i>wanted</i> my daughter to be the Maria. It&#8217;s an almost universal wish, cultivated by parents for as long as our race has been on Nakorza. In every family, one daughter is always named Maria.</q> He bends down and picks up a box wrapped in lightly tanned fur and tied with a thong. <q>But today I want no part of Nikifor&#8217;s prophecy.</q> He looks directly at me. <q>Marja loves Damjan Kolarow, and yet she must choose you. And what&#8217;s the use? It&#8217;s too late already,</q> he adds and stares heavenward.</p>

<p><q>If you&#8217;re right and I&#8217;m the space traveler who&#8217;s to leave with Marja,</q> I say, <q>perhaps you can take comfort that she&#8217;ll be saved from the Crown of Stars.</q></p>

<p>Gregor unwraps the box and sets it on the table between us. <q>I&#8217;m not so sure she&#8217;ll be saved,</q> he says, removing the lid.</p>

<p>Shiny and bronze, the Kulaii set awaits.</p>

<p>The hint of a smile dances in the corner of Gregor&#8217;s mouth. <q>It&#8217;s time you learned the rules of our favorite game.</q></p>

<p><q>All games embody a worldview,</q> I say. <q>What&#8217;s the philosophy behind Kulaii?</q></p>

<p><q>To keep playing,</q> Gregor replies. <q>The loser is the one who becomes exhausted and leaves the field. But you can also lose by placing your opponent in a situation where he has no moves left. There&#8217;s only one way to win at Kulaii, and many paths to disaster. And even at that, the winner may turn out to be a loser. It&#8217;s a very Nakorzan game, my friend.</q></p>

<p>He lights a kerosene lamp, lowers the glass globe, and adjusts the wick.</p>

<p>With my heart in my throat, I try to find out what he thinks is coming. <q>On my way here, I was told that strange things happen at the Midnight Mass.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, yes, there have been some tragic events,</q> Gregor replies offhandedly. <q>Young people, high-strung types, have thrown themselves off Oblation Rock, hoping to placate the <a id="page293"></a>Crown. But we&#8217;ve got it cordoned off this year, and guards will be posted.</q></p>

<p><q>Oblation Rock?</q></p>

<p><q>A precipice beside the church.</q> Gregor arranges the playing pieces on the board.</p>

<p><q>Were they&#8212;?</q> I&#8217;m not sure how to put this. <q>Those who died&#8230;were they all women?</q></p>

<p><q>Watch now,</q> Gregor says without looking up. <q>The first thing you must know is how to avoid trapping me in a dead zone. If you do that, you&#8217;ve lost.</q></p>

<p><q>Any stakes?</q> I ask resignedly.</p>

<p><q>Let us play for wishes,</q> Gregor replies. <q>We should each concentrate on a devout wish without saying it out loud. Whoever wins can regard his victory as a judgment from God.</q></p>

<p><q>Why not?</q> I say, and then I concentrate on Marja.</p>

<p><q>But don&#8217;t forget,</q> her father says, <q>that the winner may turn out to be the loser.</q></p>

<p><q>I know all about loss, Gregor, so save your paradoxes for another day and teach me the rules. Without rules, there&#8217;s no game. Without a game, no winners or losers.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, I wouldn&#8217;t say that.</q></p>

<p><q>Then why should we bother?</q> The wind has abated; the cold gray light steaming through the windows makes me apprehensive. <q>Your game enables the players to experience real solutions, but only to illusory problems.</q></p>

<p><q>True enough.</q> Gregor taps his pipe to empty it and puts his head in his hands. <q>And outside the game we find nothing but illusory solutions to real problems.</q></p>

<p>And so we play.</p>

<p>Hours later we are interrupted when the whole family arrives for supper, and suddenly there&#8217;s too much body heat around me, and too many smells. The blood goes to my head, and on the periphery of my vision everything dissolves in a rainbow-colored fog. Marja&#8217;s two sisters and two brothers sit with heads bent over their plates, dragging their forks through their food and tossing quick inquisitive glances at me.</p>
<a id="page294"></a>
<p>Marja rubs a bit of fat from a blouse trimmed in gold braid.</p>

<p>In slow German, out of consideration for their guest, the older son, Stojan, tells about the preparations for the Feast of the Resurrection; and I understand that the troikas will be fewer this year, because there hasn&#8217;t been enough food for the draft animals. So the trip up to Chidno for the Midnight Mass will occur mostly in open wagons. But the participants will still bring hundreds of torches, so the celebration should be, as usual, bright and festive.</p>

<p>As usual&#8230;</p>

<p><q>Are you marrying Marja?</q> her younger brother asks me.</p>

<p><i><q>Kolja!</q></i> Gregor says.</p>

<p><q>But I like Damjan better,</q> Kolja persists. <q>You&#8217;re too old for Marja.</q></p>

<p>It isn&#8217;t easy, but I smile.</p>

<p><q>Behave yourself,</q> Stojan says. Kolja shrugs and twirls strands of sauerkraut around his fork.</p>

<p>Marja puts down her utensils and blushes, but her eyes are calm, and she regards me steadily, without reproach or fear, but also without love.</p>

<p>That terrible, insistent stare, a stare that seems to devour its object: I&#8217;ve seen it before, in women who&#8217;d stopped loving me but were offering me a second chance.</p>

<p><q>Would you&#8230;sir&#8230;would you like me to show you the area tomorrow?</q> she asks, winding a lock of hair around her finger.</p>

<p><q>I&#8217;d like that very much,</q> I say.</p>

<p><q>I want to come too,</q> Kolja says.</p>

<p><q>Brat,</q> Marja says.</p>

<p>Stojan puts an arm around Kolja&#8217;s shoulders and says, <q>I need you to help me decorate the church.</q></p>

<p>Suddenly a bowl of something cool and sweet-smelling appears before me. <q>Try our <i>baridani</i> preserves,</q> somebody says. <q>A local delicacy. This may be your only chance to savor it.</q></p>

<p><q>Take a big helping,</q> someone else interrupts. <q>It&#8217;s only when they&#8217;re fresh that you have to worry about the side effects.</q></p>
<a id="page295"></a>
<p><q>And Damjan picked them,</q> Kolja says loudly, looking triumphantly at his sister.</p>

<p>Marja gulps, and Kolja presses his lips together. But then Marja starts laughing and can&#8217;t stop; she laughs so hard she has to leave the table.</p>

<p>Gregor sighs deeply. Glancing at his face, I realize that time has shriveled both of us. Kolja is right: I&#8217;m too old.</p>

<p>When the bowl of <i>baridani</i> comes to me, I take nothing.</p>

<p>It&#8217;s after midnight when Gregor leans back and rubs his face with the palms of his hands.</p>

<p><q>You won,</q> he says. And when he sees my inquiring look, he adds: <q>You&#8217;re trapped now, so I&#8217;m the one who lost.</q></p>

<p>The light from Beribek, Nakorza&#8217;s greater moon, glows through the veil of clouds and glints off the icicles, while the lesser moon, Zarela, sets in the south.</p>

<p><q>You did that on purpose,</q> I say.</p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> he says.</p>

<p><q>It feels like cheating.</q></p>

<p><q>It always feels that way, when you win.</q></p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">I go to my room. A fire blazes in the hearth, fresh water fills the earthenware jug, and the air holds the pleasant aroma of linen dried in the sun.</p>

<p>There&#8217;s also another scent I can&#8217;t identify right away, at once floral and fleshly. A lighted candle rests on the nightstand.</p>

<p>Her dark blond hair flows across the pillow, and she is very beautiful.</p>

<p><q>I&#8217;ve kept your bed warm,</q> she says with a crooked smile. And I know what she really means: Let&#8217;s get it over with. But then she folds back the duvet, and I&#8217;m hit by her body&#8217;s heat and a fragrance like a moist forest floor in summer, and I know I&#8217;ll be unable to resist.</p>

<p>Sometime near daybreak, after she has fallen asleep, awoken, and slipped away, I find myself lying beneath the duvet, listening to the beams and timbers creaking in the frosty air.</p>

<p>The gravity of the room seems oddly awry, as if some outside force is pulling me toward it, and I wish I could <a id="page296"></a>cling to Marja, but I&#8217;m alone now, waiting to be sucked into empty space.</p>

<p>On the nearby farms, animals awaken in the cold dawn, complaining of hunger by making sounds I&#8217;ve never heard before. And it strikes me that Marja will be as much a stranger on Earth as I am here. I light the candle and murmur the ancient mantra: <q>I love you, I love you, I love you.</q> But it doesn&#8217;t work.</p>

<p>The game has turned out to my advantage, but only because it was rigged at the outset.</p>

<p>And that is not love.</p>

<p>It is something even worse.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">I should feel at home here.</p>

<p>The shadow-blue and white-gold snowscape could be the Sarntaler Alps in winter&#8217;s clothing, only with a colder, more distant sun. And the icy Kolpa, whose meanderings I can discern at the bottom of the valley, is a river like any on Earth.</p>

<p>But gradually I grow aware of small disparities. The cloudless sun-drenched sky with its peculiar shade of blue. The forests of gypsy spruce with their dark green needles that peal in the wind like tubular bells. And the many odd fragrances. Even the wood smoke rising from the Stepanopol chimneys smells strange to me.</p>

<p>The air is still but so cold that my breath freezes, sticking like rime to my beard and eyelashes, and I realize that without the heavy coat, fur hat, and wool mittens I borrowed from Gregor, I would have gone running back to the house by now. But Marja wants to show me around. Or, rather, she wants to talk to me alone.</p>

<p>We follow the road from Powyrnisch, which hugs the base of the mountain some twenty meters above Stepanopol, then runs through the outlying community, where Gregor&#8217;s family lives, before descending into the valley, and doubling back to enter the town. The plows have created huge snow banks along the verges and deposited a slippery coating of frozen slush. I keep losing my balance, gaining a firm pur<a id="page297"></a>chase with my boots only in those places where people have strewn ashes in front of their houses.</p>

<p>From the road we can see rolling, denuded orchards, the town with its thatched and shingled roofs, and churches whose golden onion domes are so bright they hurt our eyes. A light chilly mist hangs above the marshes along the river. On the far side of the valley the dark Nareli Mountains, home of the Piouli, rise like a fortress of shadows.</p>

<p>Marja identifies various trees and mountains and buildings for me, expressing no desire to hear about Earth, which she claims to know far better than I know Nakorza.</p>

<p><q>We&#8217;re all free to read about our ancestors&#8217; home world in books,</q> she says calmly. <q>I&#8217;ve studied Earth history more than most.</q></p>

<p>She sounds perfectly sincere, and I marvel at her tranquility in the face of what&#8217;s about to happen. I was expecting tears and anger, wrenching confidences, and&#8212;for some reason&#8212;childhood reminiscences. But she remains aloof, focused on the here and now, protecting herself with the quotidian.</p>

<p>As we walk down toward the town, I ask her to point out the church where the midnight mass will occur.</p>

<p><q>It won&#8217;t happen in Stepanopol,</q> she replies, then stops walking and, grabbing my sleeve, turns me to the north, so I&#8217;m facing the mountain wall. She removes a pair of binoculars from her fur shoulder bag, adjusts the focus, and hands them to me.</p>

<p>In the distance I see an old onion-domed church clinging to the mountain. Beside it a shiny black outcropping juts from the snow, overhanging an abyss that drops for hundreds of meters into the ravine. <i>Stynka Schertfilor</i>. Oblation Rock.</p>

<p><q>Maundy Thursday and Good Friday,</q> Marja says, <q>we attend Mass in Stepanopol&#8212;but it is an old tradition that everyone gathers at the Church of Saint Fanurius in Chidno on Easter Eve.</q></p>

<p>She is standing so close to me now, pointing out the church (there, to the left of the sign for Powyrnisch, directly <a id="page298"></a>behind that peak, you can see the black stone glinting in the sun), that I feel the warmth of her breath. And I put an arm around her waist, try to pull her to me and turn her face toward mine; but she pushes me away, and I lose my footing on the slippery road, ending up on my back in a snowdrift.</p>

<p>To ease my embarrassment she laughs gaily, then playfully tries molding a snowball to throw at me, but the powdery snow disintegrates in her gloves. Instead she straddles me and rubs handfuls of snow in my face. Her hair falls free of her hat and brushes my eyes, and I notice that her teeth are bared in a smile. But I can&#8217;t stand to look at her glowing face, I&#8217;m glad that my vision is teary with snow and blurred by the sweep of her hair.</p>

<p><q>I&#8217;m sorry I disrupted your view of our beautiful blue sky,</q> she says.</p>

<p>I don&#8217;t know why, but I think of Fausto Caiazzo. <q>It&#8217;s okay,</q> I say as I slowly get up and brush the snow from my coat. When I was a child there were always massive, friendly clouds filling the sky. How I miss them.</p>

<p><q>I need some time,</q> she tells me as we search the snowdrift for the binoculars. <q>Last night was&#8230;I don&#8217;t know what it was.</q></p>

<p><q>I know what it was,</q> I say without explaining myself. <q>And I also know that even if you weren&#8217;t the chosen Marja, I&#8217;d still want to take you back.</q></p>

<p>We sit in the snow, looking at each other; then she puts her arms around me and rests her forehead against my shoulder.</p>

<p>I can win my Kulaii match, I decide&#8212;perhaps on my own, perhaps with help&#8212;even if I fail to take into account all the inherent contradictions of the game.</p>

<p><q>Ah, the binoculars,</q> Marja says.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">A dozen flags droop from their poles, including the regional colors and, in front of the town hall, the national banner, divided into black, white, and sky-blue horizontal stripes. A simple flag, pure and laced with frost.</p>

<p>Heavy smells of broiling meat, burning coals, and incense hang so palpably in the air that one can walk around <a id="page299"></a>the fragrances and into and out of them. Bright bits of icicles, swept from the eaves by the householders, lie glistening on the sidewalks.</p>

<p>The streets are largely deserted, but here and there I notice groups of sullen youths, huddled together, emitting hostile stares. Men of Damjan&#8217;s age, men who must know Damjan. One kid shouts a remark that makes Marja press her lips together; and I feel insecure. There is nobody to come to our rescue should Damjan&#8217;s friends get physical. The message of protective males to strangers everywhere and always: Stay away from our women.</p>

<p><q>You don&#8217;t have to worry,</q> Marja says, then leads me into a dark, smoke-filled tavern, which someone (a guest who couldn&#8217;t pay his bill?) has decorated with a crude but powerful oil painting of the Crown of Stars; I can&#8217;t decide whether the painting is intended to exorcise the threat or whether I&#8217;m having my first experience of gallows humor in New Ruthenia&#8212;or any kind of humor for that matter.</p>

<p>Except for us, the tavern room is empty; evidently Easter and the Crown have dampened everyone&#8217;s urge to revel, and I find it curious that the place is even open. The landlord, who calls himself Miklos, has long since banked the oven, so we end up settling for what&#8212;in another place and under different circumstances&#8212;I would have called snacks.</p>

<p>The beer comes in large tankards and tastes, strangely enough, like beer; but its effect isn&#8217;t a matter of alcohol only: there&#8217;s something else in the drink, something I can&#8217;t taste that lifts my heart, turns the light to gold, and shifts every color toward a cheerful hue.</p>

<p><q>They may want to kill you,</q> Marja says. <q>But as long as they believe their own lives depend on your safe return, they&#8217;ll beat you up at worst. And they won&#8217;t dare come into Miklos&#8217;s place and make trouble.</q></p>

<p>I exhale deeply, lowering my shoulders, and it feels as if someone has wrapped thick, soft duvets around my body. For a few precious seconds I decide that the Crown is nothing but an amateur painting on a tavern wall&#8212;and not a half-bad painting at that.</p>

<p>Marja turns her head and follows my gaze. <q>Of course, not <a id="page300"></a>everybody in Stepanopol thinks the way Damjan&#8217;s friends do,</q> she says. <q>Many people around here would be happy if you never got back to Earth. Somehow they prefer dying, annihilation by the Crown, to never having existed at all.</q></p>

<p>She sloshes the beer around in her tankard, then takes a long sip. <q>I don&#8217;t really understand it.</q></p>

<p>Dusk has come to the streets of Stepanopol. <q>From the instant I saw you in the train station,</q> I say, <q>I&#8217;ve been brooding about something. How can you be certain you&#8217;re the right Maria?</q></p>

<p>She looks into my eyes for a long time. Within her pale skin a blue pulse beats, darkening her high forehead and long neck.</p>

<p><q>I can think of another puzzle,</q> she says, bringing her thick dark eyebrows together, <q>one that should concern you and everyone else more than it seems to. After the space traveler got back to his planet, why did the sages turn to Maria for the vital information, the coordinates of Nakorza, instead of asking him?</q></p>

<p><q>The traveler was&#8230;not the sort of man you imagine.</q></p>

<p><q>You aren&#8217;t?</q></p>

<p><q>I would never call myself a scientist. A poet perhaps. Once the capsule understood my essential desire, my need to jump from one star system to another until we found a habitable planet&#8212;once the capsule understood me, it became autonomous, first bringing me here, then taking me back to Earth, entirely by its own devices. That explains why the sages needed Maria, but it doesn&#8217;t explain how she happened to know the coordinates of Nakorza relative to Earth.</q></p>

<p>Marja takes another swallow of beer. <q>Considering the role I&#8217;m expected to play tonight, Gerold, I believe I have the right to ask you another question. Where did you hide this capsule, as you call it?</q></p>

<p>The miraculous feeling of well-being is gone, the thick duvets have been pulled aside. All my life I&#8217;ve pretended that the world disappeared when I closed my eyes; told myself I was immortal; turned away the postman before he could give me a distressing message. And now Marja has shoved an unwanted parcel into my hands, a windowed en<a id="page301"></a>velope bearing the Great Reminder. But I cannot accept delivery, cannot make myself say: <i>I don&#8217;t know&#8212;somewhere in a cave, I&#8217;ll remember when the time is right. We&#8217;re here, Marja, and therefore I must have found it again</i>.</p>

<p>Cannot.</p>

<p>All I say is: <q>When the time is right, I&#8217;ll tell you.</q></p>

<p><q>And now I shall answer your question.</q> From her fur bag she removes a leatherbound book, thick, scuffed, and ancient. <q>How do I know I&#8217;m <i>the</i> Maria? Because of this.</q></p>

<p>I raise my eyebrows. <q>What is it?</q></p>

<p><q>My family has always kept better genealogical records than most. We know exactly which of the three hundred ships brought our ancestors here. Her name was the <i>Copernicus</i></q>&#8212;she sets her hand on the book&#8212;<q>and this is her log. The Tschuderka family rescued it from mandatory destruction, hid it away in attics and cellars for generation upon generation. The coordinates of Nakorza appear on the first page, handwritten in tiny script on silken paper.</q></p>

<p>She leans over the table, and I notice that the mild euphoria of the beer has left her as well.</p>

<p><q>From the moment the Crown appeared, I knew who I was,</q> she says. <q>I was the Maria who mattered, the one whose family had preserved the logbook. And when I realized that, I wished I&#8217;d never read the thing, wished that somebody had thrown it on the fire. Now it&#8217;s too late.</q></p>

<p>She lifts her hand to her forehead. <q>It&#8217;s all in here.</q></p>

<p>The shock interval, it&#8217;s called. The numb instant during which you read the lab report upside down as the doctor gives you his diagnosis, <i>that</i> diagnosis. The insensate interlude during which you obsess about what to wear to your mother&#8217;s funeral.</p>

<p>I reach toward her, but my hand is shaking, and I pull back. <q>I loved you from the moment I saw you skiing toward me in Powyrnisch; I&#8217;ll bring you back to Earth, try to make you happy&#8230;</q></p>

<p>I halt.</p>

<p><q>But,</q> Marja says.</p>

<p><q>Yes?</q> I say, taking a deep breath. Again I try to touch her, again I withdraw my hand.</p>
<a id="page302"></a>
<p><q>But,</q> Marja says, <q>you have no idea where the capsule is!</q></p>

<p>I swallow, shake my head. <q>No, but&#8230;</q></p>

<p>The blood drains from Marja&#8217;s face, and her teeth chatter as if she&#8217;s freezing. <q>It makes sense,</q> she says hoarsely.</p>

<p>And, oh God, it does make sense. I know what&#8217;s coming. I&#8217;m opening the letter from the collection agency, fixing on the huge amount due, wondering how I acquired this much debt. And of course I cannot pay it.</p>

<p><i><q>A wenit Damjan!</q></i> Miklos suddenly shouts.</p>

<p>The tavern door opens, and Damjan strides in from the darkness, his gray eyes full of pain, bent on keeping a promise he must have made to Marja&#8217;s family before we departed. To protect his girlfriend&#8217;s lover. To get the two of us home safely.</p>

<p>All the way up the hill to the Tschuderkas&#8217; house I walk ahead of Marja and Damjan, not far enough to seem conspicuous, but enough so I won&#8217;t sense when they stop to whisper confidences or cry together or kiss.</p>

<p>Before me the aurora borealis is flaring, strong enough to cast flickering shadows: now bleeding like a moonrise, now oscillating behind the mountains like an array of searchlights, and finally, before it vanishes, fluttering like curtains in a draft.</p>

<p>Then the stars come out, a dense cluster of suns near the galactic core, glimmering like a bejeweled iconostasis.</p>

<p>And in the middle of the cluster, high above Chidno, the black hub of the Crown hangs in the night sky like a passageway leading to a vacant sanctorum, an empty Holy of Holies.</p>

<p>Beautiful and vibrant with meaning. And meaningless and banal. Like a transcription error.</p>

<p class="chapterHeadC"><span class="bold"><i>3</i></span></p>

<p class="noindent">The Easter Eve procession of the New Ruthenians toward Chidno has begun: from the first floor window of Gregor&#8217;s house I see their lanterns, torches, and headlights bobbing amid the black ridges and along the banks of the Kolpa. The <a id="page303"></a>pilgrims travel in troikas and sledges, in carts and wagons; they sit crowded together in the load beds of pickup trucks, holding their torches aloft, renewing the resin the instant it&#8217;s consumed. Occasionally I glimpse clusters of cross-country skiers gliding through the darkness across the snowy slopes.</p>

<p>Marja&#8217;s older brother Stojan parks his flatbed truck before the house. He scrambles onto the open trailer, where he checks the torch holders and spreads soft, golden-brown pelts across the riveted steel benches.</p>

<p>Dressed in their finest Easter clothes, Gregor&#8217;s neighbors stand on the roadside, waiting for Stojan to pick them up, stamping their feet to keep warm. I join the expectant crowd; the older pilgrims offer me greetings I don&#8217;t understand, and the young men regard me with cold eyes set above broad cheekbones.</p>

<p>I feel completely alone, and when Stojan brings the truck I try to squeeze into the cab alongside him and Marja and Gregor, but instead Gregor guides me to the trailer and offers me a seat directly behind the cab, next to a torch crackling with fragrant resin. Young Kolja and Marja&#8217;s two sisters occupy the bench directly across from me.</p>

<p>The larger of Nakorza&#8217;s moons is setting: Beribek chases Zarela down behind the snowy peaks of Chidno. From a pack of predators deep within the forest comes a mournful howl, and the cry is taken up by another pack, and then another, so the message is relayed along the entire range. A cloud-mass veils the burning sky, and high above the world a black wound opens wider and wider, surrounded by a ring of starry fire.</p>

<p>As we reach the main road and join the convoy of fuming trucks, our progress slowed by dozens of troikas and sledges drawn by the short-legged draft animals whose fur shines green in the torchlight, I realize that the groups of pilgrims are all singing the same song&#8212;not an Easter hymn, but a melancholy folksong, with words I don&#8217;t understand. The performance melds with the noise of the trucks, a polyphony of human voices sustained by the bass chords of the engines, each note rising or falling in time to the rhythmic coughing <a id="page304"></a>of the exhaust pipes. From the distant Nareli range the song is answered by the long, wailing glissandi of the Piouli.</p>

<p>In the meadows, where the road to Chidno climbs toward the eastern ridge, lumberjacks and miners from up north have erected canvas tents, and stands where you can buy sausages and beer, sacks of charcoal and bundles of pelts. Their faces glow among the roaring ovens and flaming braziers; some of the skiers stop to nourish themselves before the trek up the mountain, and occasionally a customer emerges from a troika, but everyone else ignores the vendors. As the truck drivers shift into first gear, the pilgrims grow quiet, and on the other side of the river the Piouli song also fades. Slowly we ascend in a long, unbroken caravan, and I wonder how so many people will fit into one church.</p>

<p>I peer through the cab window. Marja stares straight ahead, evidently seeing nothing. Gregor turns and glowers at me, and I am forced to look away and focus on the river and the ravine.</p>

<p>About four hundred meters from our destination lies a broad flat shelf of rock, where the worshipers park their trucks and sleighs. From there the last stage of the journey takes us up the mountain slope; the path is uneven and slippery, with only a low wooden guardrail to keep the celebrants from falling into the ravine. The long climb tires the older pilgrims, who frequently stop to rest, clinging to the rude boulders and white birches. At last the Church of Saint Fanurius appears, a beautiful and imposing structure that seems to hang suspended above the chasm, filling a grotto in the cliff face; its timbers are painted gray, and its golden onion domes, illuminated from below by the pilgrims&#8217; torches and headlights, almost touch the overhanging rock. The church looks different up close&#8212;not larger, not smaller, just different, and suddenly I realize that the nave extends deep into the cavern, so that the front wall with its portals and windows is really a kind of fa&#231;ade concealing the building&#8217;s true scale. There will indeed be room for us all.</p>

<p>Colors swirl around me, muted by the night. I smell the sweat of the weary pilgrims as they gather outside the building, greeting friends and family members they haven&#8217;t seen <a id="page305"></a>in a long while. Gossip and gifts are exchanged, but the dominant mood is detached seriousness, a quiet piety. Now the crowd parts to make way for the patriarch, Father Ischaslaw, magnificent in his gold chasuble as he passes among the pilgrims and slips into the church through the door to the sacristy.</p>

<p>Cold and confused, I become separated from the Tschuderka family. For a long time I walk in circles before the church, then pace up and down on the steps. Finally, convinced that Marja and the others must have gone inside, I enter through the main door.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Immediately I am overwhelmed&#8212;by the pungent incense, the strange faces, the glittering icons, the hundreds of candles burning on the altar&#8212;but mostly by the immense size of the nave. This is a church as big as a cathedral, an arena, a town square.</p>

<p>As I shuffle down the main aisle toward the iconostasis, I notice that a side door lies open. The pilgrims&#8217; breath and bodies combine with the candle flames to send a rush of hot air through the gap and out into the night, carrying with it scraps of paper and bits of dried mud.</p>

<p>I pause beside the chancel rail and stare through the open door toward the snow-covered ledge beyond, which quickly narrows to become Oblation Rock; beyond yawns the steep black chasm. Despite Gregor&#8217;s assurances, there are no cordons anywhere, no guards in sight&#8212;not that I really expected any.</p>

<p>Maybe the door was left open to ventilate the space, I speculate, or maybe somebody merely forgot to close it; but neither possibility convinces me, and I feel helpless and confused.</p>

<p>I turn and survey the nave. More and more people jostle into the church. The celebrants press toward the iconostasis, drawn by the iridescent saints; the choir sings a hymn, and their voices envelop me and rise toward the lamps hanging from the ceiling like gilded stalactites. A draft rushes through the open door and blows against my back, making my collar ripple, and when I remove my fur hat, my hair <a id="page306"></a>flies forward over my brow. I remain beside the chancel rail, shivering, teeth chattering, determined not to let anybody pass through the treacherous portal, but knowing full well I&#8217;m no hero, my courage might desert me at the last minute&#8212;unless, of course, somebody has arranged for me to win, which is simply impossible. Briefly I meditate on the defeats I&#8217;ve known in my life, and the defeat I&#8217;m about to know, soon realizing there was really only one great reversal: a loss that has folded in on itself, visiting me again and again, iteration upon iteration, never increasing in power but always prepared to show me yet another facet.</p>

<p>Again I gaze through the open door. Above the ledge, above the church and the black sheen of Oblation Rock, the dark dome of the winter sky arches over New Ruthenia, breached by the shining Crown of Stars.</p>

<p>Contemplating the night, I feel a sudden pressure on my eardrums. The hymn has stopped. From behind me comes the cacophony of the worshipers: their gasps and sighs, the tromping of their shoes and boots.</p>

<p>I face the choir, and instantly they begin to sing again, and I hear every syllable because they&#8217;re all looking at me. The despair in their voices and the grief in the bass notes make my scalp tingle.</p>

<p>The procession of celebrants moves slowly and ominously down the aisle. At the head of the throng walk Marja and Father Ischaslaw, who helps her to stand upright and speaks softly with his face turned toward her. The patriarch&#8217;s words are drowned out by the choir, and the nave swims in a white luminous fog. Reaching the altar, Marja falls to her knees with clasped hands, her lips moving; and though I cannot hear a word, I know what she&#8217;s saying.</p>

<p>I rush toward the open door. Marja rises, and soon she and Father Ischaslaw are moving again, getting closer and closer to me, and as I plant myself beside the jamb&#8212;freezing in the winter air, burning with the fever of my misery&#8212;my decision takes form. I shall protect the one I love. I shall alter the iterations, smash the facets, and from my deepest pocket I remove the weapon I&#8217;ve sworn never to use, grasping it in both hands, my palms throbbing with my strong <a id="page307"></a>rapid pulse. I aim the weapon at Ischaslaw, and the throng of celebrants rushes toward us with livid faces, their shouts and wails ringing with anger.</p>

<p><q>Maybe this happens because I came to care about you after all,</q> Marja says, looking at me with blue eyes canopied by dark brows. Ischaslaw steps forward and grabs her arm and continues to lead her out of the church, bound for the icy ledge.</p>

<p><q>Release her and step away!</q> I scream in German, hoping he understands me; but he keeps his eye fixed on the precipice.</p>

<p><q>Put the gun away,</q> Marja rasps, breaking Ischaslaw&#8217;s grip and stepping between the priest&#8217;s body and mine. But she is too late. The bullet pierces her outstretched hand and burrows between Ischaslaw&#8217;s eyes, and he topples over and lies motionless at the crowd&#8217;s feet like a heap of autumn leaves. Marja rushes through the door, the darkness drawing her toward the precipice, and then she opens her arms, blood flowing from her wounded hand, surrenders to the icy slope&#8212;</p>

<p>For a fraction of a second she hovers above the chasm, arms outstretched, and I know that if I look behind me I&#8217;ll see the patriarch&#8217;s dead eyes, his golden chasuble, and a book lying on the church floor, its cover stained with a drop of Marja&#8217;s blood. A book whose pages contain small dense writing and a fatal transcription error.</p>

<p>&#8212;and disappears over the edge.</p>

<p>It&#8217;s very quiet.</p>

<p>She must have hit bottom by now.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Then follows a great shudder, stronger than any earthquake tremor; it seems as if the universe has slipped out of gear. An unimaginable terror seizes me, rending my soul, shredding my sanity; and then comes the final cataclysm, and whatever remains of an orderly reality dissolves into a swirling gray blur like the dancing static on a television screen.</p>

<p>I am pulled down, down, down, as if captured by a black hole; I relive my life, experience my death, endure my damnation. Am I in hell for a hundred years? A million? Then <a id="page308"></a>everything begins again, the eons flying by, and my bowels seem to rotate in their cavity, and I go blind, my melted eyes running down my cheeks, and my brain becomes a useless organ, no longer able to control my muscles. Thirst and fear. Fear and madness.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Midnight. The sacred portal stands open, and the priests come pouring from the Holy of Holies, singing <i>Christos was-chrjes!</i> Christ has risen. <i>Wai istino was-chrjes,</i> the choir and the celebrants reply.</p>

<p>Verily, he has risen.</p>

<p>I know this church without quite recognizing it, drawing comfort from its carved marble pews, modern altar, and lavish trappings, reorienting myself as if I were surveying my house after a long journey or my bedroom after a vivid dream.</p>

<p>But the stream of alternate memories lingering at the edge of my consciousness is not a dream. The nebulous, superimposed images are not phantasms.</p>

<p>Every time I tilt my head back and stare at the radiant ceiling, I grow dizzy at the sight of the hanging lamps, those gilded stalactites, and the entire vault seems to rise heavenward.</p>

<p>I line up at the altar with everyone else, and we kiss each other on the cheek and express our joy in Christ&#8217;s resurrection, and I know all the celebrants&#8217; names and who they are; but for a brief instant other faces emerge, as in a photograph printed from a double-exposure: sometimes a woman&#8217;s face with hair escaping from a fur hat, sometimes the face of a man who called me friend.</p>

<p>Real faces, real voices.</p>

<p>And then I feel an infinite emptiness. The loss of a real woman, who has never existed, who <i>chose</i> never to have existed, a woman I nevertheless love. Could any loss be more irredeemable?</p>

<p>The conditions have dissolved. The error was never propagated. Sometime in the future thousands of colonists will be sent to the right planet, colonists whose descendants now <a id="page309"></a>take me by the hand and congratulate me in this sacred, well-lighted, gloriously warm nave.</p>

<p><q>Yes, I too have tears in my eyes&#8212;isn&#8217;t it remarkable?</q> somebody says to me. <q>He has risen, he has conquered death and released us!</q></p>

<p><i>She</i>, I correct him mentally, then dip the bread in the wine and eat it with a silver spoon.</p>

<p>Hours later, as I am leaving the church, a portly man appears in the doorway of the office. <q>Gerold Schenna?</q> he asks, and I nod, startled by a feeling of d&#233;j&#224;-vu.</p>

<p>The man gestures me into his office. <q>Somebody left a phone message for you last night,</q> he tells me, studying a slip of paper. <q>Mr. Casaubon will pick you up outside the church as arranged.</q></p>

<p><q>Thanks,</q> I say, glancing at my watch.</p>

<p>It says five o&#8217;clock. And the clock on the wall concurs, and so does the clock on the secretary&#8217;s desk.</p>

<p>I wonder briefly why my watch agrees with the local time, and why all the timepieces in this place have only twelve numerals.</p>

<p>Then I walk out into the early spring dawn and look up at the stars, now fading from a sky that soon will be pure blue.</p>

<p>The first birds have begun to sing.</p>

<p>Let&#8217;s just call them birds.</p>

<br/>

<p class="chapterHeadC"><span class="bold"><i>Epilogue</i></span></p>

<p class="noindent"><q>It wasn&#8217;t a dream, was it?</q> Jordan Casaubon asks above the soft whistling of the tires as the world takes shape in the dim light of early morning.</p>

<p><q>No,</q> I answer, <q>it was no dream. A dream would be easier to understand.</q></p>

<p><q>Umm-hmm,</q> Jordan mutters.</p>

<p>We&#8217;re traveling south through a fertile, rolling landscape, an endless carpet of silken purple grasses just beginning to catch the rays of the rising sun.</p>
<a id="page310"></a>
<p>At intervals we encounter sleeping villages with whitewashed houses, and in between lie broad fields abundant with green and violet vegetation. The heady scent of farm animals and the agreeable fragrance of moist spring soil wafts through the side windows.</p>

<p>Jordan pulls over and says, <q>Get in the backseat. It&#8217;s still a long way to Ak&#250;n. There&#8217;s plenty of time for you to sleep. We don&#8217;t want you dozing off during the press conference. Roll up my coat, put it under your head, and make yourself comfortable.</q></p>

<p>I climb out and stand beside the car, which smells of fresh paint, leather upholstery, and leaking oil. A slight morning breeze, cool but not frigid, blows across my face. The hills have emerged in the sunlight, and foliage is now visible in the stands of dark trees. Spring leaves: as delicate as if painted on the branches with the finest camelhair brush. Soon the dew will turn to mist and disappear, and it will be a pleasant day in the Ak&#250;n region of Nakorza.</p>

<p>This Nakorza, which is not necessarily a happier Nakorza, simply more prosperous, more technologically advanced.</p>

<p>And a Nakorza without a Crown of Stars.</p>

<p>I recline in the backseat, exhausted and yet wide awake. A burning itch runs through my body; my underwear is already sticking to my skin, and I&#8217;m unable to get comfortable, no matter how I arrange myself.</p>

<p>Jordan catches my eye in the rearview mirror. <q>By throwing herself off the cliff,</q> he says, <q>Marja forever deleted certain material&#8212;conditions, possibilities&#8212;from&#8230;let&#8217;s call it the Great Archive. Including the wrong coordinates in the forbidden logbook.</q></p>

<p>He raises his eyebrows. I nod. <q>Recorded in the logbook, and in Marja&#8217;s memory,</q> I add.</p>

<p><q>That&#8217;s why you couldn&#8217;t find the capsule,</q> he continues. <q>It simply wasn&#8217;t.</q></p>

<p><q>It simply wasn&#8217;t,</q> I echo. <q>Or maybe I&#8217;d repressed my knowledge of where I&#8217;d hidden it.</q></p>

<p><q>In a way,</q> Jordan says, <q>Marja&#8217;s sacrifice was the ultimate solution.</q></p>
<a id="page311"></a>
<p><q>Solution to what?</q> I ask. <q>How do you solve a problem that never existed?</q></p>

<p><q>Go to sleep. If you need some help, there&#8217;s a bottle of something they call vodka on the floor.</q></p>

<p>We drive through a medium-size provincial town; for some reason the streets are gaily decorated. Garlands hang from the balconies and lampposts, waving in the pleasant breeze, and a flag of black, white, and blue billows from a pole beside a luminous marble building.</p>

<p>I open the vodka bottle, and the gentle fragrance of lily-of-the-valley, along with the flag&#8217;s evocations of sorrow and snow and sky, cause a burning in my stomach, even before the first swallow.</p>

<p><q>We&#8217;ve got our work cut out for us,</q> I say. <q>So much information to collect&#8212;the course of the colonization fleet, the manifest of every ship, the ecology of the planet.</q></p>

<p><q>Don&#8217;t sweat it,</q> Jordan says. <q>I kept busy during our vacation. All the data lie safely in a vault in Ak&#250;n.</q></p>

<p><q>The founding fathers, the first colonists,</q> I say. <q>Go through the lists of their names, Jordan. Go through the lists very carefully.</q></p>

<p><q>I&#8217;ll delete every last Tschuderka, Tschud, Cuderka, and Chuderka,</q> he assures me. <q>Because otherwise&#8230;</q> With his right hand he draws a horizontal eight in the air. The symbol for infinity.</p>

<p>I take a deep pull on the bottle, then lie down, the taste lingering in my mouth, the fragrance filling my nose and sinuses, and wallow in memories of a world that never was.</p>

<p>Happy to be beyond the settled areas, Jordan accelerates, and for a long straight stretch across the prairie I hear nothing but the whistling of our wheels and the soft buzz of the spring breeze.</p>

<p><q>The car,</q> I mutter.</p>

<p><q>What about it?</q> Jordan asks.</p>

<p><q>What do you call the make of car we&#8217;re in?</q></p>

<p><q>It&#8217;s a Torrance, I think,</q> he replies hesitantly. <q>Named for one of the first colonists.</q> And after an interval he gestures broadly, sweeping his hand across the flat open countryside. <q>Damn beautiful,</q> he says.</p>
<a id="page312"></a>
<p>Sleep is closing in around me; I look out the window at a blue and cloudless sky. For a moment I see a face dusted with snow, and I feel a slight pressure near my heart, as if someone is sitting on my chest.</p>

<p>Then the snow and the face dissolve into a flock of white birds soaring over the prairie.</p>

<p><q>Hey,</q> Jordan says, <q>you&#8217;re crying&#8230;</q></p>
</body>
</html>
