Here's A Little Quiz

 What to do:
 1) Grab a pen/pencil and paper.
 2) Mark the paper 1 to 10 down the side
 3) Answer each question and mark the corresponding letter to your
    answer on the paper
 4) Calculate the point score for each question for each of your answers
 5) Total up the points for all the questions and see where you land!

 Here goes...

 1.  When do you feel your best?

 (a) In the morning
 (b) During the afternoon and early evening
 (c) Late at night

 2.  Do you usually walk?

 (a) Fairly fast, with long steps?
 (b) Fairly fast, but with short, quick steps?
 (c) Less fast, head up looking the world in the face?
 (d) Less fast, head down?
 (e) Very slowly?

 3.  When talking to people, do you

 (a) Stand with your arms folded?
 (b) Have your hands clasped?
 (c) Have one or both your hands on your hips?
 (d) Touch or push the person to whom you are talking?
 (e) Play with your ear, touch your chin, or smooth your hair?

 4.  When relaxing, do you sit with?

 (a) Your knees bent and your legs neatly side by side?
 (b) Your legs crossed?
 (c) your legs stretched out or straight?
 (d) With one leg curled under you?

 5.  When something really amuses you, how do you react?
      Do you give...

 (a) A big, appreciative laugh?
 (b) A laugh, but not a loud one?
 (c) A quiet chuckle?
 (d) A big smile?
 (e) A slow smile?

 6.   When you go to a party or social gathering, you

 (a) Make a loud entrance so everyone notices you?
 (b) Make a quieter entrance looking around quickly for someone you know
 (c) Make quietest possible entrance? And try to stay unnoticed?

 7.  You are working hard, concentrating hard.  You are interrupted.
      Do you...

 (a) Welcome the break?
 (b) Feel extremely irritated?
 (c) Vary between these two extremes?

 8.  Which of the following colors do you like most

 (a) Red or orange
 (b) Black
 (c) Yellow or light blue
 (d) Green
 (e) Dark blue or purple
 (f) White
 (g) Brown, gray, or violet

 9.  When you are in bed at night, in those last few moments before
      going to sleep, do you lie?

 (a) Stretched out on your back?
 (b) Stretched out face dawn on your stomach?
 (c) On your side, slightly curled?
 (d) With your head on one arm?
 (e) With your head under the covers?

 10. Do you often dream that you are?

 (a) Falling?
 (b) Fighting or struggling?
 (c) Searching for something or somebody?
 (d) Flying or floating?
 (e) Or do you usually have a dreamless sleep?
 (f) Or do you have pleasant dreams?

 " SCORE YOUR OWN QUIZ " POINTS:

 1.  (a)  2   (b)  4    (c)  6
 2.  (a)  6   (b)  4    (c)  7   (d)  2   (e)  1
 3.  (a)  4   (b)  2    (c)  5   (d)  7   (e)  6
 4.  (a)  4   (b)  6    (c)  2   (d)  1
 5.  (a)  6   (b)  4    (c)  3   (d)  5   (e)  2
 6.  (a)  6   (b)  4    (c)  2
 7.  (a)  6   (b)  2    (c)  4
 8.  (a)  6   (b)  7    (c)  5   (d)  4   (e)  3   (f)  2 (g)  1
 9.  (a)  7   (b)  6    (c)  4   (d)  2   (e)  1
 10. (a)  4   (b)  2    (c)  3   (d)  5   (e)  6   (f)  1

 Add the total number of points.

 Results:

 OVER 60 POINTS:

Others see you as some one they should " handle with care." You are
seen as vain, self-centered, and extremely dominant. Others may admire
you and wish they could be more like you, but they don't always trust
you and hesitate to become too deeply involved with you.

 FROM 51 TO 60 POINTS:

Your friends see you as an exciting, highly volatile, rather impulsive
personality; a natural leader, quick to make decisions (though not
always the right ones). They see you as a bold and venturesome...
someone who will try anything - well, almost anything-once; someone
who takes a chance and enjoys an adventure. They enjoy being in your
company because of the excitement you radiate.

 FROM 41 TO 50 POINTS:

Others see you as fresh, lively, charming, amusing, and always
interesting; someone who is constantly the center of attention, but
sufficiently well- balanced not to let it go to your head. They see
you also as kind, considerate, and understanding; someone who will
cheer them up and help them out.

 FROM 31 TO 40 POINTS:

Other people see you as sensible, cautious, careful, and practical.
They see you as clever, gifted, or talented, but modest. Not a person
who makes friends too quickly or too easily, but someone who is
extremely loyal to the friends you do make and who expects the same
loyalty in return. Those who really get to know you realize that it
takes a lot to shake you trust in your friends, but, equally, that it
takes you a long time to get over it if that trust is shaken.

 FROM 21 TO 30 POINTS:

Your friends see you as painstaking, perhaps little fussy at times.
They see you as very, very cautious and extremely careful, a slow and
steady plodder. It would really surprise them if you ever did
something impulsively or on the spur of the moment. They expect you
to examine everything carefully from every side and then, usually
decide against it. They think this reaction on your part is caused
partly by your carefully nature and partly by laziness.

 UNDER 21 POINTS:

People think you are shy, nervous, and indecisive, someone needs to be
looked after, who always wants someone else to make the decisions and
who doesn't want to get involved with anyone or anything. They see you
as a worrier, who sees problems that don't exist. Some people think
your are boring. Only the people who know you well know that you
aren't. The trouble is that you don't let very many people get close
to you.
