SEX LAWS (JUST IN CASE YOU NEED THEM)....

Most Middle Eastern countries recognize the following Islamic law:
"After having sexual relations with a lamb, it is a mortal sin to eat
its flesh."

In Lebanon, men are legally allowed to have sex with animals, but the
animals must be female. Having sexual relations with a male animal is
punishable by death.

In Bahrain, a male doctor may legally examine a woman's genitals, but
is forbidden from looking directly at them during the examination. He
may only see their reflection in a mirror.

Muslims are banned from looking at the genitals of a corpse. This also
applies to undertakers; the sex organs of the deceased must be covered
with a brick or piece of wood at all times.

In Indonesia, the penalty for masturbation is decapitation.

There are men in Guam whose full-time job is to travel the countryside
and deflower young virgins, who pay them for the privilege of having
sex for the first time. Reason: under Guam law, it is expressly
forbidden for virgins to marry. ( Now let's just think for a
minute...Is there any job anywhere else in the world that even comes 
close to this?)

In Hong Kong, a betrayed wife is legally allowed to kill her
adulterous husband, but may only do so with her bare hands. (The
husband's lover, on the other hand, may be killed in any manner 
desired.)

Topless saleswomen are legal in Liverpool, England - but only in
tropical fish stores. (Huh???)

In Cali, Colombia, a woman may only have sex with her husband, and the
first time this happens her mother must be in the room to witness the
act.

In Santa Cruz, Bolivia, it is illegal for a man to have sex with a
woman and her daughter at the same time.

In Maryland, it is illegal to sell condoms from vending machines with
one exception: prophylactics may be dispensed from a vending machine
only "in places where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on
the premises." (gotta love the good 'ole USA!)
