REMEMBER ONE THING : Never give up on your dreams. People who go to
college are incredible. We go to classes. We read and absorb and are
comprehensively tested on heavy amounts of various materials. We sleep
very little. We drink ourselves into oblivion. We kill ourselves with
several types of smoke. We cough and keep sneezing. Someone is always
sick. Someone is always complaining. We become attached to close
friends. We smother each other. We lean too much, but our friends
don't mind. We think often of the past and want to go back. We know we
cannot, and soon we won't want to. We all had separate lives,
families, backgrounds and pasts. We live totally different from how we
used to live. We are frustrated and sometimes want to give up, but we
never stop trying, and our friends won't let us. We disregard health.
We eat awful foods. We are forced to think about the future. We are
scared and confused. We reach out for things, yet we don't find them.
We try to sort out our minds, which are filled with studies, worries,
problems, memories, emotions-powerful feelings. We wander the campus
looking for happiness, which can be found in a friend's smile. We
hurt-a lot, but a friend always tries to take the hurt away. We keep
going, though, because above all else, we never stop learning,
growing, changing, and most important dreaming. Dreams keep us going
and they always will. All we can do is be thankful that we have
something to hold onto, like dreams and each other. 
