It doesn't interest me what you do for a living. I want to know what 
you ache for, and if you dare to dream of meeting your heart's longing.

It doesn't interest me how old you are. I want to know if you will risk 
looking like a fool for love, for your dreams, for the adventure of 
being alive.

It doesn't interest me what planets are squaring your moon. I want to 
know if you have touched the center of your own sorrow, if you have been 
opened by life's betrayals or have become shriveled and closed from fear 
of further pain! I want to know if you can sit with pain, mine or your 
own; without moving to hide it or fade it or fix it. I want to know if 
you can be with joy, mine or your own; if you can dance with wildness 
and let the ecstasy fill you to the tips of your fingers and toes 
without cautioning us to be careful, be realistic, or to remember the 
limitations of being human. I want to know if you can disappoint 
another to be true to yourself, if you can bear the accusation of 
betrayal and not betray your own soul. I want to know if you can be 
faithful and therefore be trustworthy. I want to know if you can see 
beauty even when it is not pretty every day. I want to know if you can 
live with failure, yours and mine, and still stand on the edge of a lake 
and shout to the silver of the full moon, "YES!"

It doesn't interest me to know where you live or how much money you 
have. I want to know if you can get up after the night of grief and 
despair, weary and bruised to the bone, and do what needs to be done for 
those you love.

It doesn't interest me who you are, how you came to be here. I want to 
know if you will stand in the Center of the Fire with me and not shrink 
back.

It doesn't interest me where or what or with whom you have studied. I 
want to know what sustains you and your soul.
