New LOVE program

Not just another customer service phone call.......

(author unknown)

Service Rep: Hello, you have reached the Heart Systems Software
Company help desk. How may I help you?

Customer: I just received your latest program, LOVE v4.0...you
know....the freeware. I don't understand it. Can tell me how to
install it?

Service Rep: Sure thing ma'am. Do you have the installation disk and
instructions with you?

Customer: Yes I do, but first can you tell me what the program does?

Service Rep: Sure thing ma'am. LOVE is a unique program, there is no
other like it in the world. LOVE attaches to your operating system and
runs silently in the background, you will never see LOVE on your
monitor or your toolbar, but you will notice its affect on every
application you may have. It makes the good programs run smoother and
greatly restricts and/or deletes the bad ones.

Customer: Wow! That sounds great. How does LOVE make my machine run
smoother?

Service Rep: Well, good sound files, like COMPLIMENT.WAV,
ENCOURAGEMENT.WAV, and KINDWORD.WAV will play frequently. Also,
FORGIVENESS.EXE will be invoked every time there is an external
violation, including the ever-popular syntax errors. Also, all those
aggrevating errors that say "unable to connect" will be avoided. LOVE
allows for a smooth connection with external devices, regardless of
what country it is manufactured in, the brand name, or the age of the
model.

Customer: That's exactly what I need, my machine has been isolated for
too long. But what about the bad programs?

CS Rep: Good question. LOVE searches your memory for programs like
HATE.COM, BITTERNESS.EXE, SELFISH.COM, and SPITE.EXE. These programs
cant be entirely deleted off your hard drive ,but LOVE overpowers
those programs. LOVE stops their commands from being executed and runs
its own instructions. You will no longer hear INSULT.WAV and you wont
be able to write with the fonts "BADWORDS12" or "HARSHNESS10".

Customer: That's a fantastic program you have. Are the upgrades free too?

CS Rep: They sure are ma'am.

Customer: How do I get the upgrades?

CS Rep: That's easy. Once you have LOVE installed and running, it
automatically copies a module, or a piece of itself, to every external
Harddrive E-mail And Remote Terminal (HEART)that it comes in contact
with. In turn, those external devices run whatever version of LOVE
they have and return a module to your HEART. You will be upgraded
with each and every module that you receive. But you have to remember,
to receive the upgrades you have to be running LOVE and you have to
come into contact with other computers while it is running.

Customer: I can do that. I'm not very technical, but I think I am
ready to install now. What do I do first?

CS Rep: The first step is to open your HEART. Have you located your
HEART ma'am?

Customer: Yes I have, but there are several programs running right
now. Is it okay to install while they are running?

CS Rep: What programs are running ma'am?

Customer: Let me see....I have PASTHURT.EXE, LOWESTEEM.EXE,
GRUDGE.EXE, and RESENTMENT.COM running right now.

CS Rep: No problem. LOVE will automatically erase PASTHURT.EXE from
your current operating system. It may remain in your permanent memory,
but it will no longer disrupt other programs. LOVE will eventually
overwrite LOWESTEEM.EXE with a module of its own called
HIGHESTEEM.EXE. However, you have to completely turn off GRUDGE.EXE
and RESENTMENT.COM. Those programs prevent LOVE from being properly
installed. Can you turn those off ma'am?

Customer: I don't know how to turn them off. Can you tell me how?

CS Rep: My pleasure. Go to your Start menu and invoke FORGIVENESS.EXE.
Do this as many times as necessary until GRUDGE.EXE and
RESENTMENT.COM have been completely erased.

Customer: Okay, I'm done. LOVE has started installing itself
automatically. Is that normal?

CS Rep: Yes it is. You should receive a message that says it will
reinstall for the life of your HEART. Do you see that message?

Customer: Yes I do. Is it completely installed?

CS Rep: Yes, but remember that you have only the base program. You
need to begin connecting to other HEART's in order to get the upgrades.

Customer: Oops...I have an error message already. What should I do?

CS Rep: What does the message say?

Customer: It says "ERROR 412 - PROGRAM NOT RUN ON INTERNAL
COMPONENTS". What does that mean? CS Rep: Don't worry ma'am, that's a
common problem. It means that the LOVE program is set up to run on
external HEARTS but has not yet been run on your HEART. It is one of
those complicated programming things, but In non-technical terms it
means you have to "LOVE" your own machine before it can "LOVE" others.

Customer: So what should I do?

CS Rep: Can you find the directory called "SELF-ACCEPTANCE"?

Customer: Yes, I have it.

CS Rep: Excellent, you are getting good at this.

Customer: Thank you.

CS Rep: You're welcome. Click on the following files and then copy
them to the "MYHEART" directory: FORGIVESELF.DOC, SELFESTEEM.TXT,
REALIZEWORTH.TXT, and GOODNESS.DOC. The system will overwrite any
conflicting files and begin patching any faulty programming. Also,
you need to delete SELFCRITIC.EXE from all directories, and then empty
your recycle bin afterwards to make sure it is completely gone and
never comes back.

Customer: Got it. Hey! My HEART is filling up with really neat files.
SMILE.MPG is playing on my monitor right now and it shows that
WARMTH.COM, PEACE.EXE, and CONTENTMENT.COM are copying themselves all
over my HEART!

CS Rep: Then LOVE is installed and running. You should be able to
handle it from here. One more thing before I go...

Customer: Yes?

CS Rep: LOVE is freeware. Be sure to give it and its various modules

to everybody you meet. They will in turn share it with other people
and they will return some really neat modules back to you.

Customer: I will. Thank you for your help.
