	Everyone longs to give themselves to someone - to have a deep
soul relationship with another - to be loved thoroughly and
exclusively. But God to a Christian says, "No, not until you are
satisfied and fulfilled and content with being loved by Me alone- with
giving yourself totally and unreservedly to Me. I love you, my child.
And until you discover that only in Me is your satisfaction to be
found, you will not be capable of the perfect human relationship that
I have planned for you. You will never be united with another until
you are united with Me - exclusive of anyone or anything else,
exclusive of any other desires or longings. I want you to stop
planning, stop wishing, and allow me to give you the most thrilling
plan existing! - One that you cannot imagine. I want you to have the
best. Please allow Me to bring it to you - you just wait. That's all.
Don't be anxious. Don't worry. Don't look around at the things others
have gotten or that I have given them. Don't look at the things you
think you want. You just keep looking off and away to Me, or you'll
miss what I want to show you. And, then, when you're ready, I'll
surprise you with a love far more wonderful than you ever dream of.
You see, until you are ready and the one I have for you is ready, I am
working even this minute to have both of you ready at the same time -
until you are both satisfied exclusively with Me and the life I have
prepared for you, you won't be able to experience that love that
exemplifies your relationship with Me, and is thus, perfect Love. And
beloved, I want you to have this most wonderful love. I want you to
see in the flesh a picture of your relationship with Me, and to enjoy
materially and concretely the everlasting union of beauty and
perfection and love that I offer with Myself. Know that I love you
utterly. I am El Shaddai. The all sufficient one - believe it and be
satisfied."
