<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC
 "+//ISBN 0-9673008-1-9//DTD OEB 1.0.1 Document//EN"
 "http://openebook.org/dtds/oeb-1.0.1/oebdoc101.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta name="author" content="Robyn Hitchcock"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="style/book.css" type="text/css"/>
<title>They Came from the Future</title>
</head>
<body id="ch08">
<a id="page199"></a>
<h1>They Came from the Future</h1>
<h2>by Robyn Hitchcock</h2>

<p class="noindent"><i>Robyn Hitchcock (<a href="http://robynhitchcock.com">robynhitchcock.com</a>) lives in London. In the &#8217;80s and early &#8217;90s, he put out a bunch of terrific albums, many with songs invoking science fiction and fantasy themes. We remember them fondly, though our DVDs of them are a bit battered from frequent play, particularly <q>Globe of Frogs,</q> <q>Madonna of the Wasps,</q> and <q>Sleeping with Your Devil Mask.</q> This year, his DVD <cite>Sex, Food, Death and Insects</cite>, in which <q>legendary underground cult artist Robyn Hitchcock reveals his creative process</q> will be unleashed upon the world. On his website bio, he says that in 1965, when he was 12, having just discovered the works of H. G. Wells, he tried unsuccessfully to build a time machine.</i></p>

<p><i><q>They Came from the Future</q> appeared in <cite>Fast Forward 1</cite>. Of the poem, Lou Anders remarks, <q>Reminiscent of ideas expressed in Michael Chabon&#8217;s essay <q>The Omega Glory,</q> Hitchcock explores a sentiment all too pervasive in our current times regarding the lost promise of tomorrow as reflected in the shortcomings of today.</q> Hitchcock says, in Anders&#8217; story note, <q>As a thinking person I&#8217;m completely in despair, but as a kind of creature I&#8217;m quite happy.</q></i></p>

<hr/>

<a id="page200"></a>
<p class="noindent"><span class="bold1">T</span>hey came from the future</p>

<p class="noindent">Once upon a time</p>

<p class="noindent">In silver suits and confident helmets</p>

<p class="noindent">Reflecting our sun and historic stars</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">They came to shake our hands</p>

<p class="noindent">And laze by fountains in their silver torsos</p>

<p class="noindent">Pushing back their helmets to receive</p>

<p class="noindent">Dandelions from Earth girls and</p>

<p class="noindent">Blow them away.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent"><q>Easy when you know how,</q> said the wise ones.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Their clean-cut hair and fresh teeth</p>

<p class="noindent">Caressed our breeze.</p>

<p class="noindent">They handed out postcards of their world,</p>

<p class="noindent">Electric toothbrushes, sunlight so strong it</p>

<p class="noindent">Flowed from them in chrome.</p>

<p class="noindent">The local boys aped them,</p>

<p class="noindent">Dressed like them when they could get the gear.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Then they changed:</p>

<p class="noindent">They came now from a rough sad world that</p>

<p class="noindent">Imitated ours. Stolen mirrors, bacteria, wild teeth framed in stubble</p>

<p class="noindent">Tired breath.</p>

<p class="noindent">No one wanted to kiss them.</p>
<a id="page201"></a>
<p class="noindent">They carried <span class="small-caps">Do Not Touch</span> placards and tried to thrust leaflets into shoppers&#8217; hands.</p>

<p class="noindent">Which nobody could read.</p>

<p class="noindent">But the photos showed a frightened monkey in a noose.</p>

<p class="noindent">The girls walked round them</p>

<p class="noindent">And the boys, our silver boys, ganged up on them in dark stairwells.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">The wise ones sat in cafes, eating leaves and shoots.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Our world has lost its shine,</p>

<p class="noindent">Though there&#8217;s still money to polish it.</p>

<p class="noindent">Radiance comes in jars.</p>

<p class="noindent">The wise ones shake their heads</p>

<p class="noindent">But they&#8217;ve had a lot of practice</p>

<p class="noindent">And pack away their stalls.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Boys are angry, girls are scared</p>

<p class="noindent">Bloated like carcasses, dwindled to bones:</p>

<p class="noindent">The future isn&#8217;t what it was</p>

<p class="noindent">And somebody must pay.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">The boys, our boys in silver blade patrols, caught one last refugee.</p>

<p class="noindent">I saw them take him one grim green dawn</p>

<p class="noindent">Pushing him backwards through the mall, pushing him down against the wall</p>

<p class="noindent">They finished him with stones:</p>

<p class="noindent">He had nothing to offer them.</p>

<p class="noindent">Our sunlight framed his dying shadow.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">After that, no one came from the future:</p>

<p class="noindent">We&#8217;ve reached it, after all.</p>

<p class="noindent">Too real to dream, the clouds protect me from the rising sun.</p>

<p class="noindent">Stars keep their distance</p>

<p class="noindent">Tattooed on a ceiling we no longer dream of reaching.</p>

<p class="noindent">Not this way, not as us</p>

<p class="noindent">Not the silver boys, no way.</p>
<a id="page202"></a>
<p class="noindent">Yet, this is no time to be sour&#8212;the hour is now, and it&#8217;s our turn</p>

<p class="noindent">To visit them.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Ready, boys?</p>
</body>
</html>
