<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC
 "+//ISBN 0-9673008-1-9//DTD OEB 1.0.1 Document//EN"
 "http://openebook.org/dtds/oeb-1.0.1/oebdoc101.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta name="author" content="William Shunn"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="style/book.css" type="text/css"/>
<title>Objective Impermeability in a Closed System</title>
</head>
<body id="ch15">
<a id="page318"></a>
<h1>Objective Impermeability in a Closed System</h1>
<h2>by William Shunn</h2>

<p class="noindent"><i>William Shunn (<a href="http://shunn.net">shunn.net</a>) and his wife recently moved from New York City to Chicago, where he became a full-time writer. Before that he worked as a database developer and architect. He holds degrees in Electrical and Computer Engineering and English from the University of Utah. He says he is <q>at work on a memoir entitled <cite>The Accidental Terrorist</cite>, a complete draft of which can be heard in my podcast at <a href="http://shunn.net">shunn.net</a>.</q> He began publishing stories in 1985, using the byline <q>D. William Shunn</q> until 1996. He is the author of a number of short stories, and has been nominated for major SF awards. His first book, a short horror novel entitled <cite>Cast a Cold Eye</cite>, co-written with Derryl Murphy, is to be published in 2009.</i></p>

<p><i><q>Objective Impermeability in a Closed System</q> was one of six chronological stories in his 2007 chapbook, <cite>An Alternate History of the 21st Century: Stories</cite>. In it, his protagonist invents a time machine in order to asynchronously solve a central problem in his life.</i></p>
<a id="page319"></a>

<hr/>

<p class="first"><span class="first-letter">H</span>is meticulous preparations complete, Hector Baratoux stooped and entered the time machine called Albert. His interactive resignation statement was sequenced for replication and autodelivery first thing the next morning. The cut of the clothes he wore was not current, but their drab neutrals were, and at a whispered command the fabric would come alive with the garish colors of the late thirties. The AIs were busy chasing down solutions to an obscure Shishekli transform involving the distribution of small bodies in Saturn&#8217;s rings&#8212;though that was really just for plausible deniability, so they could claim their attention had been elsewhere. Just one sub-aware subprocess was plotting Hector&#8217;s translation, and would throw the switch at his word.</p>

<p>If that thread executed properly, in moments he&#8217;d flip from 2059 Grenoble to 2037 Geneva, there to father his 21-year-old daughter Garbi&#241;e.</p>

<p>He fluttered his damp palms. Finally he wiped them on the backs of his pant legs.</p>

<p>The interior of the cramped gray egg smelled of long-chain polymers. Hector sat down on a clayey lump that formed into a seat beneath him and molded itself to his stiff posture, practically begging him to relax. The default control panel emerged from the blank forward surface, awaiting reconfiguration instructions, while above it a wide, curving band of the egg faded to transparency. His windshield.</p>

<p>It was a Sunday evening. The small lab was dim, lit only by the few diagnostic displays on the otherwise quiescent <a id="page320"></a>walls. <q>Journand and Charlotte?</q> Hector asked. <q>Albert, where are they?</q></p>

<p>No single AI or subprocess actually ran the time machine alone, but since none of them had names they&#8217;d ever deigned to share with the humans on the project, and since their identities were fluid and portions hotswappable anyway, the humans had adopted a convention of addressing them all by the name of whichever project was relevant at that moment. Thus, any mind on the worldline mapping project was Hendrik, any on matter tranformation was Dee, and any on physical translation was Albert.</p>

<p><q>Your token security apparatchiks?</q> said a grating, sexless voice. A swirl of color roiled on the control panel, teasingly approximating meaningfulness. <q>On average, the two are about as far from this room as they&#8217;re ever likely to be simultaneously.</q></p>

<p>There was more obfuscation in that statement than useful information, but Hector was used to the AIs and their games. Even a subprocess seemed to take perverse pleasure in simulating obstructionism simulating helpfulness. But that was fine. Hector&#8217;s mission would have been hopeless if they didn&#8217;t view such human concerns as politics, security, and even identity with mischievous condescension at best. In fact, his mission would be inconceivable&#8230;.</p>

<p>Hector was more concerned about the two security guards, who, as EU non-citizen residents, might be at some risk if they lost their jobs. As project administrator, he would normally be the one to finalize termination decisions, but in this instance of course the question would be out of his hands. He just hoped he could trust the AIs either to back his story that the guards were blameless or to conceal the evidence of his temporal incursion altogether.</p>

<p>It was more reassuring to dwell on that than to worry about how Arantxa would react to his appearance.</p>

<p>Arantxa Oxanguren. He had met her in &#8217;31, early in his postgraduate studies at l&#8217;&#201;cole Polytechnique. She was an undergrad in one of his lab sections, and he was so diffident about eye contact that he didn&#8217;t even realize for three weeks that she was attending in person and not by telepresence. An <a id="page321"></a>image that beautiful had to be an avatar. But no, she was Euskadian&#8212;a porcelain-skinned, black-haired Basque who was first in her family to attend university&#8212;and in the wake of her new country&#8217;s war for independence and EU membership there just wasn&#8217;t the technical infrastructure still intact to make remote schooling a right as opposed to a luxury.</p>

<p>Hector, while mainly of Proven&#231;al extraction, was born and raised in bourgeois comfort near Paris, but still he&#8217;d always nurtured vague revolutionary dreams. Meeting someone whose people had not only had something real to fight for, but had against all odds succeeded, fired up all his romantic imaginings. Normally shy and reserved, unlike his many hyperverbal classmates, he nonetheless found his cause in fighting for Arantxa&#8217;s affections, and against all odds he also succeeded.</p>

<p>In the summer of &#8217;32, at the start of her senior year, they moved in together, to a tiny flat in Phase 1 of the Paris Arcology. The nanotech revolution, though it promised universal plenty, was still in its infancy, and the old economy thrashing like a giant in its death throes. Small as their flat was, they never could have afforded a slot in the high-tech monolith without student subsidies. Hector hoped the programmable layout and d&#233;cor would make up for the size, but as the months passed Arantxa only came more and more to deride their surroundings as the decadent trappings of a bumbling and wrong-headed technocracy.</p>

<p><q>Such banal wonders! Luxuries unimaginable even to kings in ages past, but what good do they do us?</q></p>

<p><q>Well&#8230;plenty.</q></p>

<p><q>Like what? I can watch fields of grain wave on the walls, but does that feed me?</q></p>

<p><q>No, but it&#8217;s snowing outside, and you&#8217;re warm and dry.</q></p>

<p><q>Any dumb house could do as much. But changing the furniture at will? What good is that when billions are starving?</q></p>

<p><q>Projects like this are the proving grounds, Rani. It&#8217;s how we learn to use and control the technology.</q></p>

<p><q>Fritter it away, you mean. Distract ourselves from the politics that keep it from doing any good to the ones who don&#8217;t look like us.</q></p>
<a id="page322"></a>
<p>Arantxa&#8217;s vision was one of technological revolution sweeping the world like brushfire, scouring politics away, an enterprise for which the liberation of Euskadia had only whetted her appetite. This fervor was why he loved her so much; her vision gave form to Hector&#8217;s less concrete dreams of crusading for change. Why then did he try to rein her in, to impose his entrenched and craven caution on her?</p>

<p>Perhaps it reflected his disappointment in himself at butting up against the boundaries of his intellectual capacity&#8212;a new and unpleasant experience in his academic career. On his good days he could almost get his head around the mathematical superstructure of the object-oriented cosmology that now seemed the best hope of unifying physics. His half-completed dissertation on objective impermeability in closed Trencke systems&#8212;the idea that certain OO events were black boxes with observable effects but causes indeterminate and undeterminable&#8212;broke no new ground; it was simply a working out of some of the overlooked implications of other theorists&#8217; work. Still, on his bad days he stared at the virtual pages like a miner deep underground whose headlamp had inexplicably dimmed and died.</p>

<p>The months leading up to Hector&#8217;s dissertation defense were the first severe test of his relationship with Arantxa. With her heart safely won, or so he believed, he felt free to direct the energies he had used to woo and keep her back into his work. This was fine for a while, since she had her own senior thesis on nanoassembler methodologies to complete, but as time wore on she grew less and less patient with his preoccupation. Even their arguments couldn&#8217;t fully engage his attention, and while these clashes often ended with her storming out of their <q>klutzofascist nightmare grotto,</q> they left Hector feeling slightly perplexed and disoriented. This only worsened when she abandoned him for her home city of Guernica the summer after her graduation.</p>

<p>Even with all that was to come, Hector would remember that summer&#8212;facing first a hostile doctoral committee then a hostile Basque lover, and somehow convincing both to yield&#8212;as the most exhausting of his life. But it set him in good stead for a career, as his job interviews that sum<a id="page323"></a>mer were a comparative breeze. He signed on with CERN that fall as a junior liaison in public affairs, something the reticent scholar never would have predicted even a year earlier. But, as the committee chair told him, <q>You have a way of explaining concepts such that I can almost believe you understand them.</q> Even Hector had to admit it was a perfect fit.</p>

<p>So he dragged Arantxa to Switzerland, where after only a year&#8217;s delay she was able to commence her own postgraduate studies at the University of Geneva. Hector helped represent CERN at scientific symposiums, conferences, and summits all over the world. On occasion Arantxa was able to travel with him; more often her studies interfered, as did, increasingly, terror alerts and outright war. Decades of adventurism abroad had finally caught up with the United States; paranoid and isolationist, the superpower&#8217;s latest doomed attempt to dictate the terms of global discourse was to withhold nanoware from unfriendly regimes (most of the Third World and parts of the First). The policy only provoked riots and worse, while terrorism, endemic worldwide since the upheavals of the Aughts, escalated inside and outside the U.S. Hector was all for open-sourcing, especially with the means to end scarcity at hand, but CERN had other priorities, and in any case was ultimately responsible to Brussels, which couldn&#8217;t afford to alienate Washington to too great an extent. Arantxa, for her part, thought the U.S. could go hang.</p>

<p>Still, this didn&#8217;t prevent them from visiting an ever-resilient New York City early in the summer of &#8217;36, where they celebrated Arantxa&#8217;s own successful dissertation defense with Blue Point oysters and local beer. Hector by then had moved from public affairs to lobbying. He considered it a step up. Arantxa did not.</p>

<p><q>At best it&#8217;s a lateral move.</q></p>

<p><q>At best?</q></p>

<p><q>You know what I think of lobbyists.</q></p>

<p><q>We&#8217;re not a corporation, Rani, and I&#8217;m not a hired gun. This is where the big battles are fought, against those people.</q></p>
<a id="page324"></a>
<p><q>Right, one taxpayer-financed junket at a time. Hector, you&#8217;re better than this&#8212;smarter.</q></p>

<p><q>If I&#8217;m so smart, where were all the research offers three years ago?</q></p>

<p><q>The world&#8217;s not ready for your kind of smart. But I am. Why else would I be with you?</q></p>

<p>But the job was an easy slide for Hector&#8212;and a giant blow to Arantxa&#8217;s hopes of settling down in Bilbao and registering for their allotted two children. (She wouldn&#8217;t have them in Geneva and raise any scrimy Swiss individualists.) To himself, Hector readily admitted that he was dragging his feet, that the responsibilities of parenthood terrified him, and that the tantalizingly close breakthroughs in OO energy extraction fascinated him far more than a child ever would. The words burned hot in his throat, but he could never figure out how to say them to Arantxa.</p>

<p>Marking time, Arantxa accepted a research fellowship at the University of Geneva. Hector&#8217;s travel schedule grew even more hectic, and Arantxa took to spending her every break at home in Guernica. Hector missed her fiercely when they were apart; telepresence and virtual sex weren&#8217;t enough to sustain him. During every absence he would promise himself that he&#8217;d work harder on their relationship, but somehow could never make himself emotionally available to her when they were together. A hole was growing in his chest faster then he could fill it back in.</p>

<p>By the end of the next summer, he&#8217;d begun to suspect that Arantxa was having an affair. It was nothing he could put his finger on. She simply struck him as happier, more content, calmer. Something was bringing her greater fulfillment than she&#8217;d had for as long as he&#8217;d known her, and God knew he wasn&#8217;t doing anything differently. He couldn&#8217;t blame her at all; he&#8217;d had a couple of brief dalliances of his own, far abroad from Geneva, but neither had brought him any peace of mind. No, Arantxa acted, he was forced to admit, like a woman in love.</p>

<p>At the same time, their perennial political arguments had taken on a new urgency. Arantxa favored the breaking down of national borders by means of technological equalization. <a id="page325"></a>Hector pointed out just as forcefully the ruin wreaked on countries deploying leaked nanoware the most blatantly and with the least oversight. Whole economies were foundering as their industrial bases went under. People were dying.</p>

<p>Yes, Arantxa agreed, but was it better that some should die quickly in the cause of plenty, or that whole nations should strangle and starve by degrees as the scab of poverty was peeled back by the West an inch or two every decade?</p>

<p>Hector made no headway with his arguments, but despite their heatedness Arantxa&#8217;s affection for him only seemed to grow, even during a long autumn apart. When Hector&#8212;weary from junkets to Brussels, Washington, Seattle, Kyoto, Delhi, Cairo, Vienna, and half a dozen other cities&#8212;joined Arantxa for Christmas in Bilbao, where she was spending a semester as a visiting instructor, it was to be confronted by her glowing announcement that she was ten weeks pregnant.</p>

<p>Hector reeled. They hadn&#8217;t physically been together since early September. His worst suspicions were confirmed.</p>

<p>And yet. Yet why was she breaking the news with such obvious joy?</p>

<p>He would ask himself repeatedly for the next two decades why he didn&#8217;t open his mouth, stamp his foot, punch the wall, collapse to the floor, anything but stand there mute and disbelieving. But her apparent lack of shame so stunned him that he was persuaded any problem he saw with the situation came from him. He might have said something, still, if after a full minute of waiting for a reaction from him Arantxa hadn&#8217;t laid a cool, slim, strong hand on his chest and said, <q>I know this is a lot to take in, but it&#8217;s going to be fine. You&#8217;ll see.</q></p>

<p>But it wasn&#8217;t fine. As 2038 rang in, a glowing crater replaced much of central Washington, D.C. In the subsequent pandemonium that was global diplomacy, and despite the U.S. battening down its borders even more tightly, it was easy for Hector to find excuses to travel abroad. He took on assignments he could and should have left in the hands of junior staffers, even after Arantxa returned to Geneva to continue her fellowship. Day by day, even as he slipped on <a id="page326"></a>his dataspex to chat with her from wherever he happened to be, Hector could see her regard for him curdling, calcifying. He didn&#8217;t fight it; he felt it was justified. As pocket nukes bloomed in more cities worldwide, Arantxa defied sense and travel advisories every Friday to fly the suborbital to Euskadia. By late spring, she didn&#8217;t even bother going back some Mondays, just carried on with her research the best she could remotely.</p>

<p>Hector didn&#8217;t come to Guernica for the birth, which occurred July 14, right on schedule; he didn&#8217;t even attend remotely. Why should he? The child wasn&#8217;t his, even if Arantxa seemed to expect he would and should help raise it. Her. It.</p>

<p><q>Hector, you&#8217;re breaking my heart.</q></p>

<p><q>There are two hearts in this.</q></p>

<p><q>Three now.</q></p>

<p><q>That&#8217;s not my problem.</q></p>

<p><q>Please, Hector. You&#8217;re the only man I can imagine raising this baby with. The only man I&#8217;d want to. Please. Trust me, Hector. Hector?</q></p>

<p>Less than two weeks later, stunning the world, a runaway <q>gray goo event</q> hit Guernica, reducing an area twenty blocks in radius to formless slag. There had been nanotech accidents before, but nothing on this scale. People, cars, houses dumb and smart, all were disassembled molecule by molecule in under three minutes. It was Guernica&#8217;s worst disaster in the 101 years since the German bombardment. Hector frantically scoured cyberspace for news from Arantxa, but she seemed completely unreachable. Her relatives, while present online, refused to acknowledge his pings.</p>

<p>The first substantive news he received was from an entirely unexpected quarter: a man and a woman in black suits emitting EU government ID certificates of such deep encryption that he&#8217;d never seen the like. He dodged questions about her politics, contacts, and movements until they finally sighed, squirted him a highly specific security certificate which he accepted, and ack&#8217;d that she&#8217;d been tracked into the event zone minutes before the goo erupted.</p>

<p>Arantxa, it seemed, had long been a known confederate of cryptoanarchist cabals instrumental in leaking nano<a id="page327"></a>ware peripherals and recipes to proscribed regimes. It was suspected the groups had darker aims than simply regional destabilization, that they were gunning for larger game. It was suspected they knew they were being monitored, and the Guernica event was a last-ditch effort to erase the trail.</p>

<p>This meeting was bad enough, but soon his personal firewall was being pinged by lawbots, informing him that, with the death of Arantxa Oxanguren presumed official, he was now sole legal guardian of one Garbi&#241;e Miren Edurne Oxanguren Baratoux. His firewall&#8217;s protests were overridden with standard genetic evidence. The likelihood the 17-day-old girl was his daughter exceeded 99.999997%.</p>

<p>Impossible, he told himself. He&#8217;d had the standard testi-collar since before university. No spermatazoan could enter his seminal plasma unless he deliberately switched it off; he never had, and according to diagnostics the collar had never malfunctioned. Arantxa could never have swiped so much as a fertile milliliter of semen.</p>

<p>Irrelevant, spouted the lawbots.</p>

<p>Maybe she was cloned from a cell sample?</p>

<p>No smallest sign exists of the genetic degradation endemic in cloned organisms. She&#8217;s yours. Sign here.</p>

<p>Garbi&#241;e, Basque for <q>pure.</q> Hector couldn&#8217;t resist a bitter laugh. Arantxa&#8217;s immaculate conception. Her name meant <q>thornbush,</q> and she was still pricking him from the far side of the grave.</p>

<p>Hector could not abandon science, but he could abandon the relentless advocacy of political stances that rendered science a weapon against the world&#8217;s poor. He tendered his resignation and flew to Guernica to retrieve Garbi&#241;e from Arantxa&#8217;s hostile and combative family. He hired two full-time nannies, put in for several administrative positions, and proceeded to distance himself in every way possible from the forces that had conspired to rob him of the one point of light in his dour existence. His heart he locked up tight, and the public key he threw away.</p>

<p>Years passed. Borders came, went, and changed. The world, like an atomic nucleus shedding protons, settled into <a id="page328"></a>a slightly more stable configuration. Hector moved from government project to government project, while Garbi&#241;e moved from boarding school to boarding school. The problem of OO energy extraction was solved at last, the solution refined, and cheap, clean energy tapped from seeming nothingness became a reality. This breakthrough spawned a myriad of new technologies over the next few years, including OO computation&#8212;Turing machines that ran directly on the fabric of spacetime. It didn&#8217;t take long for these computers to reach a complexity sufficient for self-awareness, and soon every government and world body had its coterie of AI <q>advisors.</q></p>

<p>Scarcity of resources was no issue&#8212;particularly now, when the very nature of matter could be changed by issuing it the right instruction&#8212;but distribution of resources still lagged, at least until the AIs took an interest in the problem. With nearly everyone&#8217;s needs seen to, and personal wealth increasing by the day across the board, serious conflicts were on the ebb. And for the few malcontents, colonization of the moon and Mars and expeditions beyond were all under way.</p>

<p>Garbi&#241;e was a smart, angry girl of fifteen when Hector was tapped to administer a new secret project at one of CERN&#8217;s multifarious descendants. He spoke to her as little as possible, not because he meant to alienate her but because, as with Arantxa, he had never recovered from an early failure to open his mouth. <q>Oh, I&#8217;m sorry,</q> she might say during one of their infrequent chats, <q>am I boring you, Hector?</q></p>

<p><q>No, of course not.</q></p>

<p><q>Because you look like you&#8217;d rather be doing anything else.</q></p>

<p><q>Bini, that&#8217;s not true.</q></p>

<p><q>You know, if you can&#8217;t even feign interest in my shit, you could at least wear an avatar, learn to look like you&#8217;re multitasking, whatever. Anything but sit there looking like you&#8217;re cornered by wolves.</q></p>

<p><q>I&#8217;m interested, I am. Tell me more about your&#8212;that class&#8212;the one&#8212;</q></p>

<p><q>End.</q></p>
<a id="page329"></a>
<p>But even these exchanges became rote over time, litanized. All this progress, and human emotions still collided one against another until the sharp edges were sanded away and there was nothing left to hold onto and halt their Brownian motion. But some sharp edges remained, as Hector realized when he was briefed on the new project: time travel.</p>

<p>The theory was old hat&#8212;OO instructions could alter not just a particle&#8217;s physical properties, but its position in space and time as well&#8212;but the details of the implementation as it was explained to him slid right past him. To him it was as if a blinding spotlight had speared a long-darkened chamber of his heart. He did not deliberate. He knew the solution to the mystery. He accepted the position on the spot.</p>

<p>The human side of the project was concerned, among other things, with sending observers to gather evidence supporting this or that historical claim&#8212;most of which never seemed to Hector important enough that they should bother&#8212;and to engage in limited intelligence operations rooted in a certain persistent government mind-set that even Hector could see was becoming outmoded. The AIs&#8217; motives for the project were more murky, but at least in part it involved creating a thorough map of the relative positions of trillions of points on the Earth&#8217;s surface back through millions of years of time. This helped prevent a human sent back, say, twenty years in time from finding the Earth had moved in its orbit and he was floating in space.</p>

<p>Hector bided his time on the project, learning and codifying its ins and outs, all his machinations bent toward the one moment that would make sense of the previous two decades. In the loneliest depths of his scheming, he often thought of Arantxa. How much had she known of the true nature of that affair? How much might she have pieced together or guessed? How much was still impenetrable to her? In those final tortured arguments of theirs, how much information was she holding back?</p>

<p>And what about his future self, the man who fled to the past to take comfort and pleasure from his own dead wife? What kind of ghoulish, opportunistic vulture was that man?&#8212;was he?</p>
<a id="page330"></a>
<p>One still in mourning, no doubt. One to be pitied.</p>

<p><q>Hector, are you ready?</q> Albert asked, its voice the screech of a knife on metal. <q>Our security window is limited.</q></p>

<p>He realized he&#8217;d been sitting in the time machine without moving for several minutes. For the past six years, the necessity of this act had been an article of faith, but now that it came down to it, he could not make himself give the command. He had imagined time and again what he might say to Arantxa when first he saw her again, but now the thought of himself, thick and fiftyish, propositioning her, taking her home, to their home, her home, perhaps inciting the very events that would lead her to that fateful nexus in Guernica, filled him with nausea. In his mind&#8217;s eye he saw his seed looping back in time and forward again, a monstrous fractal helix with no beginning and no end, a M&#246;bius strip of suffering that burrowed through the lives of all the few people he loved. The image brought his doctoral dissertation to mind for the first time in over a decade, and Hector experienced a flash of insight almost physical in its impact.</p>

<p><q>Albert,</q> he said, his voice neutral. <q>Have you ever observed closed Trencke systems arising spontaneously?</q></p>

<p><q>Interesting question,</q> Albert said. <q>In nature, you mean?</q></p>

<p><q>Where else?</q></p>

<p>A pause ensued, and dragged on long enough for Hector to picture some fractious debate raging across dimensions. Sweat trickled down his spine.</p>

<p><q>Frequently,</q> said Albert at last.</p>

<p><q>How frequently?</q></p>

<p><q>More than one per million seconds since we&#8217;ve been aware. Those are direct observations. We may have missed as many as an order of magnitude more at the micro level.</q></p>

<p>Hector translated the numbers in his head: perhaps as many as one a day. His skin prickled.</p>

<p><q>And these are all effects with indeterminate causes?</q></p>

<p><q>Undeterminable,</q> said Albert. <q>Though we have reason to believe the arisal of these Trencke systems is tangled up somehow with our own existence, and with certain of our <a id="page331"></a>waste energies that propagate backward in time. We believe no other human knows of this, Hector.</q></p>

<p>He put his head in his hands, overwhelmed. All the baseless misunderstanding, accusation, and confusion the world must contain! All the useless pain, inflicted for no reason. And here he was, the one man who might reasonably know better, endlessly circling back to causes and forever running away from effects.</p>

<p>He wept. Some of the tears that dripped between his fingers were swallowed up by the material of the time machine.</p>

<p>After a few minutes he wiped his face, rose, and ducked out the open hatch. <q>Thank you, Albert,</q> he said. <q>If you&#8217;d see that my resignation statement is delivered as previously arranged?</q></p>

<p><q>It&#8217;s nothing.</q></p>

<p>As he left the lab, Hector drew his dataspex from the inside pocket of his jacket and slipped them on. With precise movements of his eyes he dispatched a chat invitation to Garbi&#241;e. Long, long seconds passed, and panic swelled in his chest at the thought that she might have vanished in a puff of paradox.</p>

<p>But she ack&#8217;d soon enough, presenting in cyberspace the way her mother had so many years before&#8212;no flashy adornment or enhancement, just a natural image. And she looked so much like Arantxa, but with Hector&#8217;s nose and disapproving mouth. So much like them both, and so much not. Her skull was fully hardwired, for one thing, and Hector often had the uneasy feeling in dealing with her that he was meeting a representative from a new species. A species that couldn&#8217;t have existed without its AI uplifters and still sought to flail blindly against them, playing out the same doomed drama of rebellion and revolution as the generation before, and the generation before that, reflecting and refracting and propagating its dissatisfaction to both ends of time.</p>

<p><q>What do you want?</q> said Garbi&#241;e, and Hector flinched at the suspicion and hostility in her voice.</p>

<p><q>I was just thinking about you,</q> he said, for once letting the words pour out. <q>Thinking about something you said, <a id="page332"></a>that I have no interest in you. I know I&#8217;ve never shown it, but I do. At any rate, I want to. It&#8217;s just&#8212;you make me think so much of your mother. But she&#8217;s gone now. She&#8217;s gone.</q></p>

<p>Garbi&#241;e for once was silent, a stricken look on her face. Her image overlay the corridors and staircases of the facility like a ghost as he made his way toward the dying light of day.</p>

<p><q>Maybe I can come there, and we&#8217;ll talk about her,</q> Hector said.</p>

<p>And Garbi&#241;e answered, <q>That&#8217;s as good a point on the curve as any.</q></p>
</body>
</html>
