<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC
 "+//ISBN 0-9673008-1-9//DTD OEB 1.0.1 Document//EN"
 "http://openebook.org/dtds/oeb-1.0.1/oebdoc101.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta name="author" content="Tony Ballantyne"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="style/book.css" type="text/css"/>
<title>Aristotle OS</title>
</head>
<body id="ch02">
<a id="page41"></a>
<h1>Aristotle OS</h1>
<h2>by Tony Ballantyne</h2>

<p class="noindent"><i>Tony Ballantyne (<a href="http://tonyballantyne.com">tonyballantyne.com</a>) is a British writer, living in Oldham, England, with his wife and children, whose works tend to focus on the subject of Artificial Intelligence and robotics. In college he studied mathematics and later became a teacher, first teaching math and, later, Internet technology. He began publishing SF short stories in 1998, mostly in <cite>Interzone</cite>, and has since published three idea-rich novels: <cite>Recursion</cite> (2004), <cite>Capacity</cite> (2005), and <cite>Divergence</cite> (2007), which comprise the Recursion trilogy. If there is such a thing as post-cyberpunk hard SF, that&#8217;s what he writes. He had such a good year in 2007 that we include another story by him later in this book.</i></p>

<p><i><q>Aristotle OS</q> appeared in <cite>Fast Forward 1</cite>, edited by Lou Anders, one of the best anthologies of the year, from which we have taken several stories for this book. Claude Lalumiere described the story as <q>a biting satire of our computer-dominated lifestyles.</q> It&#8217;s about operating systems and belief systems. Here Ballantyne writes in the mode of Rudy Rucker&#8212;painting not merely with broad brushstrokes but with a broom, in order to get at the essential weirdness of computer operating systems.</i></p>
<a id="page42"></a>

<hr/>

<p class="first"><span class="first-letter">T</span>urning on a computer has a whole different feel nowadays, but I had to write this somehow.</p>

<p>I&#8217;m running CP/M now. If that doesn&#8217;t mean anything to you, then it soon will. It&#8217;s an old operating system from the seventies: A <i>Platonic</i> OS. Lots of people are installing it.</p>

<p>It&#8217;s only a few months since I heard the term <i>Platonic Operating System</i>.</p>

<p>I wish I hadn&#8217;t. I wish I&#8217;d never listened to my brother.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent"><q>Can you fix it?</q> I asked. Ken was gazing at the screen with that half smile on his face he always has when he&#8217;s doing me a favour.</p>

<p><q>It&#8217;s not broken,</q> he snorted. <q>You just had the security settings turned up high. The computer must have detected unsuitable words in your files.</q></p>

<p><q>What are you implying?</q></p>

<p>Ken gave a laugh. <q>Don&#8217;t be so sensitive. They&#8217;re there to stop children accessing inappropriate stuff on the Internet. Of course, most children would have no problems turning them off. Don&#8217;t worry. I&#8217;ll soon have things sorted.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh good.</q></p>

<p>He tapped away, the clacking of the keys the only sound in my half-empty flat. So much space to fill with half the furniture gone&#8230;</p>

<p>There seemed to be empty spaces in the conversations between Ken and me too, lately. Just like this one.</p>
<a id="page43"></a>
<p><q>Do you want some more coffee?</q> I asked, breaking the silence.</p>

<p><q>Yes please.</q> He held out a flowered mug, one that Jenny must have overlooked when she disengaged her possessions from mine. <q>And how about a spot of brandy in it?</q> he added. <q>It&#8217;s cold out there.</q></p>

<p>He leant back in the elderly chair and gave a dramatic sigh. <q>Of course,</q> he declared, <q>the <i>big</i> problem here is that you are still using a <i>Platonic</i> operating system.</q></p>

<p>Ken has this way of dropping conversational hooks then sitting back and looking smug whilst he waits for you to bite on them. Normally I&#8217;d just ignore him, even say something sarcastic, but&#8212;just like when you speak to the tax office&#8212;you&#8217;re always polite to the person who is fixing your computer.</p>

<p><q>Platonic operating system?</q> I asked. <q>I thought it was just Windows, like everyone uses.</q></p>

<p>He laughed at that.</p>

<p><q>Windows, Linux, Mac OS. They&#8217;re all the same. They model the real world inside your computer. Whether you&#8217;re running a spreadsheet to do your household accounts, or playing a car racing game, you&#8217;re just running an imperfect model of the real world.</q></p>

<p>He looked at me again, another one of those little pregnant pauses. I was the one who went to university, he was saying. I was the one who studied philosophy; he had left school to become an electrician.</p>

<p><q>Okay,</q> I said. <q>Plato said that humans experienced the world like a group of people sitting inside a cave, watching the shadows of reality that dance on the walls before them. Are you saying that my computer just does the same? Models shadows on a wall?</q></p>

<p><q>You got it,</q> said Ken sliding a plastic case from his pocket and holding it up for me to see. <q>This is something new. It dispenses with the paradigm that the computer only <i>models</i> the real world. This operating system makes the assumption that everything input is real.</q></p>

<p>I took the case from him and turned it over in my hands. There was a shiny CD-ROM inside, half hidden by a torn piece of paper on which were scrawled the words <q>Aristotle OS.</q></p>
<a id="page44"></a>
<p><q>What&#8217;s the point of that?</q> I asked.</p>

<p><q>You&#8217;ll see.</q> He pressed a button and the DVD tray on my computer slid smoothly open.</p>

<p><q>Ken,</q> I began, <q>I&#8217;m perfectly happy with my computer the way it is. All I want to be able to do is write articles and lesson plans. Maybe try to keep track of my spending&#8212;</q></p>

<p>It was too late. He had already dropped the disc into the tray and was beginning to type at the keyboard.</p>

<p><q>Now,</q> he said. <q>Where&#8217;s my coffee?</q></p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Ken eventually left two hours later with a promise to meet at our mother&#8217;s house for dinner the following Sunday. I didn&#8217;t hold out much hope. Something would come up; an old acquaintance would buttonhole him in a pub somewhere. Either that or he would lose track of time, busy downloading more illegal stuff from the net. It had been a long time since he had made a family meal. I looked across at my guitar, gathering dust in a lonely corner. It was longer still since Ken had come around on a Wednesday night so we could rehearse together. I couldn&#8217;t remember the last time we had played a gig&#8230;.</p>

<p>I busied myself with tidying up the kitchen. I had an article to write, but, truth be told, I was putting off starting it. I didn&#8217;t want to see what Ken had done to my poor computer. His modifications tended to complicate my life, not simplify it. They were all done in good faith, of course, but sometimes I longed for the days of my old AMSTRAD word processor with its green screen and simple commands. I groaned as I saw my PC, its screen, once a familiar pale blue, now shining at me in bright orange.</p>

<p>Maybe I should mark a set of essays ready for tomorrow&#8217;s lessons.</p>

<p>Still the orange screen seemed to be staring at me.</p>

<p><q>Okay,</q> I said, seating myself before it. <q>Let&#8217;s see what Ken has done this time.</q></p>

<p>The screen looked pretty much the same as before, apart from the bright orange background. I clicked START and launched my accounts spreadsheet.</p>
<a id="page45"></a>
<p>It was exactly as I had left it. Neat columns showing my monthly income and expenditure. Ken had been hassling me to use a copy of the Money Management software he had installed, but I preferred this. I could understand it. I had control. I could spot mistakes. Just like that one there.</p>

<p>I was saving up for a car. Each month I transferred what I could into my savings account. That month I had mistyped an entry. &#163;10 instead of &#163;100. That was easily rectified. I clicked in the cell and made the change. An error message flashed up on the screen.</p>

<p class="chapterHeadA">Reality dysfunction. &#163;10 is not &#163;100</p>

<p><q>I know that,</q> I muttered. <q>I made a mistake.</q> I tried the correction again and received the same error message.</p>

<p><q>Bloody Ken.</q></p>

<p>I picked up the plastic disc case, still lying by the keyboard and read the scrawled insert. <i>Aristotle OS</i>. That was a clue, of course.</p>

<p><q>Come on now, Jon,</q> I said to myself. <q>You can figure this out. Ken said that this was not a Platonic OS. This does not model reality&#8230;.</q></p>

<p>It made a certain sort of sense, when you thought about it. Aristotle believed that Plato had got it wrong. Reality wasn&#8217;t something that existed <q>behind</q> us and could only be seen as shadows; it wasn&#8217;t something that could only be modeled with our reason. Aristotle believed reality was that which we perceived through our senses.</p>

<p>What senses did a computer have? Inputs. Keyboard presses and mouse clicks. Digital samples of sounds and images played into their memories a byte at a time. If the keyboard had said there was &#163;10 in the savings account this month, then &#163;10 there was. If the keyboard later on said there was &#163;100, then the computer would want to know which was right. It would be like me opening my wallet and finding &#163;100 in crisp notes there, when minutes before there had only been &#163;10. I&#8217;d want to explain the change.</p>

<p>I gazed at the screen. What was the point of my computer <a id="page46"></a>acting like this? Well, it was easily fixed. I entered another &#163;90 in the cell below the &#163;10. There. Now I had &#163;100 in my savings account.</p>

<p>If only mistakes in life could be remedied so easily.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">I grew to like the Aristotle OS. It came into its own when I was typing up long articles. I came to rely on the little messages that flashed up as a piece of work took shape.</p>

<br/>

<p class="center"><span class="bold">J Davies cannot have published<br /> <cite>An Introduction to Existentialism</cite><br /> in 1982 <i>and</i> 1984</span></p>

<p>or</p>

<br/>

<p class="center"><span class="bold">Grumman cannot have been born both<br /> French and German</span></p>

<br/>

<p>It had other uses too. Ways of making you think; of confronting you with your own assumptions.</p>

<br/>

<p class="center"><span class="bold">Why do you begin so many sentences<br /> with the word <q>Hopefully</q>?</span></p>

<br/>

<p>or</p>

<br/>

<p class="center"><span class="bold">Why give &#163;40 to <i>Feed the Homeless</i> when this month<br /> you threw out food to the value of &#163;45?</span></p>

<br/>

<p>Why indeed? I resolved to be more careful with my shopping. I would eat everything that I bought. There was half a lettuce going brown in the bottom of the fridge. I boiled a couple of eggs and made a salad with it.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">My first inkling that something was not quite right came when Ken phoned late one night, maybe three weeks after he had installed Aristotle.</p>

<p><q>Hey, Jon&#8230;</q> His speaking was slurred. I could hear the <a id="page47"></a>clink of glasses in the background, the muffled sound of laughter made by men drinking in a pub after hours.</p>

<p><q>Ken,</q> I said. <q>It&#8217;s two o&#8217;clock in the bloody morning. Can&#8217;t it wait?</q></p>

<p><q>Jon, have you been using your computer?</q></p>

<p><q>Of course I&#8217;ve been using my computer. Why have you rung me in the middle of the night to ask me that?</q></p>

<p><q>No. No. I don&#8217;t want another pint. No. Whisky.</q> His voice was muffled. I could picture him standing there, that way he did, phone cradled at his neck, shaking his hand in a <q>drink</q> gesture at the barman. <q>No. No Jon. That should be okay. Of course you should use your computer. Just don&#8217;t connect it to the Internet.</q></p>

<p><q>What? Why not? How am I supposed to read my mail? Look Ken, what&#8217;s the matter with you?</q></p>

<p>The line went dead.</p>

<p>I went back to bed and stared at the ceiling. I couldn&#8217;t go back to sleep. My mind drifted inexorably to Jenny. What was she doing now, I wondered? After half an hour of torturing myself I got up and went into the lounge and picked up my guitar, blew the dust off it. I tried to play something, but the strings were old and I couldn&#8217;t tune them.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">The picture on my computer screen was of Ken and me, standing on the summit of Ben Nevis. It was a cold scene, gray cloud swirled over the lifeless vista: rocks and rubble and the remains of a building. A man in a yellow waterproof and thick woollen hat could be seen squatting there, stirring a pan on a portable stove. Steam from hot soup rose into the air.</p>

<p>Ken was dressed in a thin jumper and coat; on his feet was a pair of old training shoes. He looked as if he had wandered out of a pub in Fort William with a couple of his mates and decided to climb the mountain for a laugh.</p>

<p>That&#8217;s exactly what he had done.</p>

<p>He was holding up a can of Tennants Super Lager for the camera to see. I stood by him, in my old Craghoppers jacket, looking seriously concerned for my brother&#8217;s well being.</p>

<p>A picture paints a thousand words&#8230;This one captured <a id="page48"></a>the moment perfectly. It told the viewer everything they needed to know about my relationship with my brother.</p>

<p>Just one thing. I&#8217;ve never been to Ben Nevis.</p>

<p>How had the computer managed to superimpose me onto that picture?</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Ken almost looked embarrassed when he came around.</p>

<p><q>Look,</q> I said. <q>Look!</q></p>

<p>I clicked the mouse, flicking through picture after picture on the screen. Me in front of the Taj Mahal; a strange city of silver towers, the Houses of Parliament clearly visible nestling amongst them; an aeroplane the like of which I&#8217;d never seen, flying over a blasted plain.</p>

<p><q>Where have they come from?</q> I asked. <q>I certainly didn&#8217;t put them there.</q></p>

<p><q>No,</q> said Ken. <q>It&#8217;s Aristotle. It&#8217;s trying to make sense of contradictory data. Let me explain.</q> He looked around for inspiration. <q>I know; it&#8217;s better if you close your eyes&#8230;.</q></p>

<p>I stared at him. He looked a mess.</p>

<p><q>You stink of beer,</q> I said. <q>When are you going to sort yourself out?</q></p>

<p>He looked angry.</p>

<p><q>I&#8217;ve got nothing to sort out. Look, close your eyes. I&#8217;m trying to explain it to you. Do you want me to fix your computer or not?</q></p>

<p>That threat was always there. I closed my eyes. <q>Now what?</q></p>

<p><q>Now imagine an orange. Are you doing that? Imagine the feel of its skin, that slightly waxy, warm sensation. Imagine pressing your thumbs into it, forcing a hole, juice squirting over your hands, that sharp citrus smell in your nose&#8212;</q></p>

<p><q>Is there a point to this?</q> I said, my eyes tightly closed.</p>

<p><q>Yes. Open your eyes. Look at me. Now, tell me. How do you know what you just experienced was imagination and not the real thing?</q></p>

<p><q>Is this some sort of philosophical question. &#8216;Am I a butterfly dreaming I am an Emperor?&#8217;</q></p>

<p><q>No. I&#8217;m dealing with facts, not some philosophical bollocks. Listen, I&#8217;ll tell you how you know the difference: the <a id="page49"></a>signals in the neurons in your brain that fired when you imagined the orange were not as strong as they would have been if you had <i>really</i> handled one. The same neurons fired, but there was a difference in the magnitude of the signal.</q></p>

<p><q>If you say so&#8230;.</q></p>

<p><q>I do say so. Well, your computer can&#8217;t do that. For a computer, a memory location is either on or off. It holds something in memory, it accepts an input, it has no way of knowing if what it has stored is real or imaginary. You connected your computer to the Internet. It has encountered all sorts of data out there. Games, models, jokes&#8212;some things that are just plain wrong. But it has no way of knowing what is real and what is made up. It tries to resolve what it sees as contradictory realities. Your pictures are an example of your computer doing just that.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh. So what are you going to do about it?</q></p>

<p>He held out another disc. This one read <q>Kant 2.0</q> <q>This&#8217;ll sort it out.</q></p>

<p><q>Why don&#8217;t I just go back to Windows?</q></p>

<p><q>You can&#8217;t. Aristotle won&#8217;t let go. It refuses to accept a Platonic OS as valid. It will upgrade to Kant, though. Don&#8217;t ask me why.</q></p>

<p>I gave a grim smile. <q>I know why.</q> It wasn&#8217;t often I managed to put one over on my brother where computers were concerned. <q>Kant built on Aristotle&#8217;s materialism. He distinguished between the thing in itself, and the way it appears to an observer. He said that we only experience the world through the forms of time and causality. I&#8217;m guessing that the upgrade on that disk will give my computer just enough of a context to make sense of the world.</q></p>

<p>Ken swayed as he looked from me to the computer. His clothes smelled of stale cigarette smoke.</p>

<p><q>Whoever thought that philosophy could be useful?</q> he said sarcastically.</p>

<p><q>Whoever designed the program on that disk, I imagine,</q> I replied sweetly.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Kant 2.0 seemed to do the trick. The composite picture of me and Ken at the top of Ben Nevis was efficiently separated into <a id="page50"></a>its component parts and placed in a query folder, along with other files with ambiguous dates. I went through the folder at my leisure, assigning the files to their correct context.</p>

<br/>

<p class="center"><span class="bold">Picture files <q>Jon Paris.jpg</q> and <q>Ken Eiffel Tower.jpg</q><br /> have the same date. Merge Yes No?</span></p>

<br/>

<p>They had the same date because both files would have been newly created when I copied them across from my old computer. Piece by piece I separated my life back out, disentangling it from the imaginary web in which it had become entangled.</p>

<p>I found it quite therapeutic. Like playing my guitar.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">All seemed to return to normal. Until I came home late one evening from college and found a message on the screen.</p>

<br/>

<p class="center"><span class="bold">hi jon gone to mallons with charlotte and najam <br />back late don&#8217;t wait up jen xxx</span></p>

<br/>

<p>It was from Jenny. There was no doubt about it. She regarded ignoring punctuation or the shift key as a way of demonstrating her refusal to take my work seriously. It was <q>only writing</q> after all.</p>

<p>But what was she playing at, e-mailing me now?</p>

<p>Her number was still on my mobile. I dialed her. She answered on the third ring.</p>

<p><q>Jon. What do you want?</q></p>

<p>The sound of her voice still hurt, especially when it was twisted into something so suspicious and hostile.</p>

<p><q>Me?</q> I replied. <q>What do you want? What do you mean; you&#8217;ve gone to Mallon&#8217;s?</q></p>

<p><q>Why shouldn&#8217;t I go to Mallon&#8217;s?</q> she said. <q>It&#8217;s Charlotte&#8217;s birthday.</q> I could hear the sound of a jukebox playing in the background: wine bar jazz, bland saxophones over a Latin clave. The sort of MOR crap I hate. <q>Anyway,</q> she snapped, <q>what&#8217;s it got to do with you? Are you spying on me?</q></p>

<p><q>What?</q> I looked at the computer screen again, just to <a id="page51"></a>confirm that I wasn&#8217;t seeing things. <q>Spying on <i>you</i>? No. I got your message.</q></p>

<p><q>What message? Jon, stop pissing me around.</q></p>

<p>And at that the line went dead.</p>

<p>I stared at the screen for a while, then I went to close the message down. A prompt appeared on the screen.</p>

<br/>

<p class="center"><span class="bold">Save changes to file? Yes No</span></p>

<br/>

<p>After a long moment, I clicked on the Yes Button.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">I don&#8217;t think I could name the exact moment I realised I was not living my real life. It was a slow process of comprehension, a picture that gradually took form as the different pieces slotted into place. It was like watching an image downloading from the Internet on a slow connection.</p>

<p>Here there was an e-mail from Jenny telling me that she would meet me at the Tate at seven that night.</p>

<p>Here was confirmation of two tickets to see Chris Smither at the Half Moon in Putney. Two tickets, one for me, one for Ken.</p>

<p>Here was a picture of Jenny and me riding on a boat down the dark stripe of the Thames, late on a warm July evening. London rose up on either bank outlined in red and yellow and white lights. What a delightful scene for a wedding reception. I could see Charlotte in the background, looking beautiful as the bride.</p>

<p>Here was confirmation of a flight to Geneva, and later on there was picture of Ken and me sitting on the terrace of a refuge high in the Italian Alps. Ken was holding up a glass of water to the camera to say <q>cheers!</q> His nose was burned red by the sun; he looked happy and healthy and utterly relaxed and I felt suddenly stifled by the half empty room in which I sat. South Street was so dull and lifeless compared to the world on my screen. I stared again at Ken, looking so peaceful. When was the last time I had seen him so happy with nothing but a glass of water in his hand?</p>

<p>That was my computer. That was Kant 2.0. It viewed the world through keyboards and scanners and microphones, <a id="page52"></a>and built up a pattern of life through causality and time that was as optimised and validated and free from illogicality as was anything else on my computer. My new OS didn&#8217;t understand about repression and self destruction and pride and all those other human traits in which Ken and I had steeped our lives. On the screen I could see my PC living out my life for me as it should have been lived, if only I had the courage and the sense to have seized my opportunities as they came along.</p>

<p>And it made me feel sick to my soul to see it, because there, dancing in the pixel light of my dim room, there was no room for excuses or dreams or might-have-beens. That was a picture of my failure in negative, a successful life painted for all to see in twenty-four-bit glory.</p>

<br/>

<p class="noindent">Ken rolled up at my house two nights later. It was half past ten, there was still forty minutes worth of drinking time left in the pubs, but I guess his money had run out. I offered him a coffee; he accepted it with a decent measure of brandy poured in for luck.</p>

<p><q>Ken,</q> I said. <q>Why didn&#8217;t we go and see Chris Smither?</q></p>

<p>He sat back on my old sofa, knocking yesterday&#8217;s newspaper onto the floor, and took a big drink.</p>

<p><q>Chris Smither?</q> His eyes lit up for a moment. <q>Yeah&#8212;he did that cool arrangement of Statesboro Blues. How did that go again?</q></p>

<p>He put his mug down on the carpet and began to play air guitar. <q>Doo dn doo dn dah dah&#8230;Wake up Mama, turn your lamp down low&#8230;doo dnn&#8230;</q> He shook his head. <q>I don&#8217;t know. We just didn&#8217;t have the time, I suppose.</q></p>

<p>He mimed some more, singing to himself. Ken used to play the guitar a lot: he was very good. Way better than me. I pulled my computer chair up so that I was sitting closer to him.</p>

<p><q>Why not?</q> I asked. <q>Why didn&#8217;t we have time? It&#8217;s not like we ever do anything. I spend my evenings sitting here at a computer typing out lesson notes and articles that are never published. What about you?</q></p>
<a id="page53"></a>
<p><q>I don&#8217;t know. I guess I was busy. You know how it is&#8230;.</q></p>

<p><q>Busy doing what? Ken, we used to go to a concert at least once a week. You used to love listening to live music.</q></p>

<p><q>I still do.</q></p>

<p><q>No you don&#8217;t. Ken, we&#8217;d have been at the concert if you hadn&#8217;t been &#8216;too busy.&#8217;</q></p>

<p>I tapped at the keyboard and brought up the picture of Ken sitting outside the refuge in the Alps, glass of water in his hand.</p>

<p><q>Looks good, doesn&#8217;t it?</q> I said. He didn&#8217;t seem surprised to see it. I pressed home my point.</p>

<p><q>We&#8217;d have taken that holiday if you hadn&#8217;t decided to stay in the pub and have another drink. That</q>&#8212;I pointed to the PC&#8212;<q>knows the logical thing would have been to put down your beer and come with me to the travel agents.</q></p>

<p><q>What does it know?</q> said Ken dismissively.</p>

<p><q>That you&#8217;re an alcoholic.</q></p>

<p>The words were out before I could stop them. Ken held my gaze for a lengthening time, and then both our eyes slid back to the computer screen.</p>

<p><q>Have you been on the Internet lately?</q> he asked, changing the subject.</p>

<p><q>Just for e-mail. Research, that sort of thing.</q></p>

<p><q>Have you looked at the news sites?</q> There was an edge of danger in his voice.</p>

<p><q>I prefer to read the papers.</q> I looked at the tangled mess of yesterdays <cite>Guardian</cite> being ground into the floor by his restless feet. He stood up suddenly.</p>

<p><q>Come here,</q> he said, walking to my computer.</p>

<p>He opened the web browser and typed in an address at the top: news.bbc.co.uk.</p>

<p>My Internet connection is slow. The words and pictures dropped into place piece by piece, slowly revealing the picture of the world as understood by Kant 2.0.</p>

<p>There were pictures of cities full of gleaming towers.</p>

<p>A classroom full of beaming black children.</p>
<a id="page54"></a>
<p>A field of tanks, painted in rainbow colors, flowers growing amongst their tracks.</p>

<p>A spaceship sitting on the red rocky surface of Mars.</p>

<p>I turned to Ken.</p>

<p><q>That&#8217;s not true, is it?</q> I said. <q>None of it is real.</q></p>

<p><q>No,</q> said Ken. <q>But it could be. If we really wanted it.</q></p>

<p>There was another of those deepening silences that seemed to have infected our lives. Eventually, he held out his mug.</p>

<p><q>More coffee?</q> I said.</p>

<p><q>Yes. Don&#8217;t forget the brandy.</q></p>
</body>
</html>
