<big>Where Do You Want to Go Today?</big>

<big>Peru!</big>

Ok, this is a wiki to record notes and links and whatnot for the upcoming Peruapalooza in June. I don't really know how to work wiki software, but everyone can figure it out from the [http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Help User's Guide].

Lesson one is creating new pages is done by creating a link to them in an existing page and then adding in the content.

So far the trip is two weeks starting sometime in June. Matt Estes' wedding which Wayne and I really need to go it is June 2, so it would need to be after that.

== When We Go'n? ==

===Personal Schedules===

====When are you free or not free?====

: Wayne: Can't do June 1st - 3rd.
: Will: Can't do June 1st - 3rd.
: Sonja:
: Brett:

====Can you do a two week trip?====

: Wayne: Yes.
: Will: I'm likely quitting my job, so decidedly so.
: Sonja:
: Brett:

===Weather===

: [http://www.justperu.org/peru/whentogo.asp Peru Travel, When to go to Peru?]

===Events===
: [http://www.andeantravelweb.com/peru/destinations/cusco/fiestas_cusco.html#inti%20raymi Inti Raymi] (The Festival of the Sun- Sacsayhuaman, Cusco, 24 June)

== Machu Picchu and the Inca Trail ==

===Will you hike the Inca Trail?===

: Wayne: I would be up for either. I might lean towards the short trek if it was simply two more days of walking versus doing something else.
: Will: I think we should definitely do some of the hiking. I think the two day trek is the best idea as well.
: Sonja:
: Brett:

===Trail Routes===

*[http://www.andeantravelweb.com/peru/treks/incatrail4.html The 4 Day Trek]
*[http://www.andeantravelweb.com/peru/treks/incatrail2.html The Short Trek]


== Potential Things to See and Do ==

=== Amazon River Cruise ===

: One of two of the main ways to experience the Amazon and the rainforest is to take a boat. Haven't looked into this much yet. And I'm not sure how much you're able to do and see from a boat.

:The [http://www.fodors.com Fodor] guidebook describes the river tours as stopping frequently at towns to let people explore villages and take little hikes and whatnot.

=== Jungle Lodge and Rainforest Exploring ===

: There are a dozen or two jungle lodges that appear to offer a very direct experience of the rainforest. They drive you out to the lodge which is completely surrounded by rainforest all around. There you stay in basically a jungle hotel and are taken out on trips into the forest. They even have excursions up into the canopy with ropes, harnesses, and all that. Looks pretty cool, but may be a little pricey. We'll have to look into the details.

:The guidebook I am reading says that many of these lodges don't have electricity. They also describe being woken up at 5am to go see "thousands of parrots coming to feed on <em>something I forget</em>." I think that sounds amazing and I am more than willing to rough it a bit. Honestly, I want to get a wild sort of Amazon experience without too much tourist coddling.

=== Pacaya - Samiria National Reserve ===

=== Rio de Janeiro ===

=== Galapogos Islands ===

=== Personal Interest ===

: Wayne: I definitely want to see Machu Picchu. That's a given. I'd also like to experience the Amazon and rainforest, but at this point I'm not sure of the best way to do that. Rio looks amazing and I'd really like to experience the city. It comes in just barely below the Amazon since to some extent "a city is a city". At the moment the Galapagos Islands come in last really for no particular reason.

== Cuanto Costa? (How much is this gonna cost?) ==

{| style="min-width: 50%"
|- 
| '''Airfare'''
| '''Cost'''
|-
| US to Lima
| $$
|-
| X to X
| $$
|-
| '''Amazon Cruise'''
| $$
|-
| '''Jungle Lodge'''
| $$
|- 
| '''Machu Picchu'''
| 
|-
| 4 Day Trek
| $$
|-
| Short Trek
| $$
|-
| '''Etc.'''
| $$
|}

(Best prices to date.)

=== Airfare ===

There are several different airports under consideration. Hereafter they will be referred to by their international airport designations:

{|
|-
| '''City'''
| '''Designation'''
| Bristol, TN
| TRI
|-
| Charlotte, NC
| CLT
|-
| Atlanta, GA
| ATL
|-
| Lima, Peru
| LIM
|-
| Cuzco, Peru
| CUZ
|}

The best prices I have seen are from [http://www.onetravel.com OneTravel] using their multi-stop option. It is not as flexible as [http://www.airtreks.com AirTreks], but it was cheaper.
<br>

== Miscellaneous ==
=== Plugs and Outlets ===

:Peru's standard voltage is 220V. That's the same voltage our big appliances (refrigerators, washers, and driers) use here in the U.S. They do not have one standard plug either. It seems they may use the [http://www.lonelyplanet.com/worldgu
