When you say, "the rich", I think you're only really talking about the 0.1%, the billionaires, not the millionaires. Those who can give away entire fortunes, and could support a liveable wage for how many hundreds of thousands if they so desired?

I think Elon's a fool for choosing to remain a red pilled menace despite the amazing benefits his companies would see if he were the American darling we all so desperately want to exist. That the man who won capitalism somehow deserved that vastly unequal amount.

I guess no one's out there making podcasts  to teach him how to be the more noble person. That'd be an interesting series to record; something tailored to deprogram Musk.

I've been composing a message to elon@tesla.com describing my game which centers around the interactions of 13 teams, each Captained by someone existing in society. I have Cyan. :mango:, as winner of America, has Gold. Musk, as the winner of capitalism, gets one.

I'm going to suggest that we execute the plan in such a way that :mango: doesn't learn about it until the end of his term. We start by fabricating battles in the various wars he's starting. We move on to other types of historical events without ever letting it break in social media that we're altering :mango:'s reality.

Huge numbers of people are in on it. Hundreds of thousands eventually, but he's the last to learn about it after he leaves office *(& almost certainly immediately has a stroke :joy_cat:)*. He goes down in history as the President who was overthrown & didn't learn about it for two years. One of history's biggest dupes.

Ultimately, the game is an alternative mechanism for deciding how resources are allocated. I'm still working on the tokenomics, but I know, at the least, that there are 13 of them & they have favorable exchange for certain services.

One, for example, being Silver: a private police force who you can contract for rules enforcement. The representatives would arrive, privately live-streaming the entire encounter.

They'd show up for everyone, regardless of their capacity to pay. But they'll log the time spent on patrol and take donations from the world at large to cover those without enough.

Ultimately, that's what land ownership by the State is about: who do you call when someone's breaking the rules. And who do they call to kick you out when you're breaking the rules.

Another team is Brown which manages shelter. The idea is to deprecate certain institutions & take the space they currently occupy. Start with churches, move on to banks, and finish with loads of businesses that only exist because money is scarce.

Break up the spaces into coherent spaces down to the level of the furniture, and make them available to rent with different areas being controlled by different teams at different times of the year.