<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC
 "+//ISBN 0-9673008-1-9//DTD OEB 1.0.1 Document//EN"
 "http://openebook.org/dtds/oeb-1.0.1/oebdoc101.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta name="author" content="Gregory Benford"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="style/book.css" type="text/css"/>
<title>Reasons Not to Publish</title>
</head>
<body id="ch14">
<a id="page313"></a>
<h1>Reasons Not to Publish</h1>
<h2>by Gregory Benford</h2>

<p class="noindent"><i>Gregory Benford (<a href="http://gregorybenford.com">gregorybenford.com</a>) lives in Irvine, California, and is one of hard SF&#8217;s chief spokesmen. He has in the last two years become a CEO of several biotech companies devoted to extending longevity using genetic methods. He retains his appointment at UC Irvine as a professor emeritus of physics. He is the author of more than twenty novels, including the SF classic <cite>Timescape</cite> (1980). Many of his (typically hard) SF stories are collected in <cite>In Alien Flesh</cite>, <cite>Matters End</cite>, and <cite>Worlds Vast and Various</cite>.</i></p>

<p><i><q>Reasons Not to Publish</q> was published in <cite>Nature</cite>, somewhat cut to fit. The full version is contained here. Told in the distant third person, it is an ironic, ambiguous, pro-science fable. It is also an idea story that SF readers are likely to remember for a long time. Maybe there is a message imbedded in the physical universe that strongly implies the existence of God. And maybe God doesn&#8217;t want anyone to blow his cover.</i></p>
<a id="page314"></a>

<hr/>

<p class="first"><span class="first-letter">R</span>oger made the greatest discovery in scientific history by noticing a jitter in his left eye.</p>

<p>He was hiking in the High Sierra on a crisp fall day, alone in the Glass Creek valley. The jitter was not a fluttering bird, but an entire tree jumping in and out of focus, light playing on it in eerie, slanted shafts. He watched it for a while, then walked under the pine. The bark felt smooth but looked fissured. It flavored the air like a real pine. The creamy bark stuttered beneath his fingers. The whole tree and all around it ratcheted, went grainy, sometimes vanished.</p>

<p>Roger was a mathematical physicist and had seen something like this before. A bad simulation, jumpy and scattered, just like this pine. His face paled, his breath caught, but the conclusion was clear. This backcountry he loved to hike through off-season was&#8230;a simulation.</p>

<p>Probably, he judged, because usually there was nobody around in late autumn. No need to spend computation time to keep pine needles waving before no audience. Just distribute motion between the harmonics of limbs, branches and clusters, to save computing time. He knew that a cheap simulation of light scattering replaced a detailed calculation with plausible rules of thumb, much quicker than the real thing, but realistic&#8212;as long as nobody looked too closely.</p>

<p>So Roger looked around, closely.</p>

<p>Seen from here, Mammoth Mountain jumped around, shifting colors. Background clouds lost their cottony look and sometimes vanished.</p>
<a id="page315"></a>
<p>An eerie prickling climbed his spine. The logic was clear. So&#8230;he was a simulation.</p>

<p>It took a day and night of hard drinking to do some hard thinking about the implications. From his condo in Mammoth he watched the looming mountain and it was fine, not jumpy. He went for a splashy swim in the pool, savoring the flavors of the air and water, the sigh of pines singing in a fragrant, dry wind.</p>

<p>But back in the Glass Creek valley again, the same ratcheting blinked in and out. A cost-smart sim, stretched to its limits. Someone was being thrifty.</p>

<p>What did the Programmer God want? To watch a universe evolve, or just a simmed Earth? To rerun human history? Was the software even written by humans at all? He glanced around, uneasy.</p>

<p>Hiking back to his car, Roger sucked in the clean air that now seemed like perfume. Life, even fake life, was more precious than ever.</p>

<p>He could not stop his mind from working the problem, though.</p>

<p>Why was the simulation getting stressed now? Maybe the computation cost of running a world of 6 billion people had stretched resources? At least some of those 6 billion, wonderful folk like Roger, felt complex internal states. That, he knew. Descartes, after all.</p>

<p>But 6 billion people like him, with his complex inner states? His sharp, darting mind, his sensual layers, his robust hunger for life? (Okay, he admitted, maybe that was laying it on a bit thick. But still.)</p>

<p>Such detail must cost a bundle in bit-rate. With population rising, computation costs climbed. Maybe the system had hit the wall, strained to its limit. That could explain why nobody had noticed this before. Or had they?</p>

<p>The people he saw ambling in the Mammoth streets might be simple programs. To test that, Roger walked up to a few at random and they acted just like real people&#8212;except nothing was real, he reminded himself. Maybe they were as deep as he was.</p>

<p>How could God the Programmer handle the data rate for <a id="page316"></a>such complex people? Could He (or She, or It) run some complex people like him, with full interior states, and just use rubrics for the mob?</p>

<p>Probably, since The Programmer was running short on bit rate. Plus, it would explain a lot of what was on TV. Maybe the mindless people on talk shows really were mindless.</p>

<p>In a way, he felt liberated. He certainly couldn&#8217;t care about fake people.</p>

<p>He stopped walking, looked around at the eggshell blue sky, sucked in the sharp aroma of late Fall. The logic was clear. All the goals he had were nothing compared with this knowledge.</p>

<p>All else being equal, then, he shouldn&#8217;t care as much about how he affected the world. Only the Programmer God mattered, because She could erase you.</p>

<p>Could he be the first to see the world as it really was? Or rather, wasn&#8217;t?</p>

<p>How many <q>people</q> had noticed that the flaws of Nature told us that the laws of Nature were from software, running on some machine?</p>

<p>Population was still rising. Some people might need to be pruned to lower costs. How to stay alive, then? Or rather, <q>alive</q>?</p>

<p>Be interesting to the Programmer. Be famous. Or original. Or maybe funny.</p>

<p>Roger was none of these, really. Smart, sure. Observant, yes. That was about it. Maybe he was in mortal danger of being erased.</p>

<p>But he did know that this sim-Earth was fake. It seemed pretty unlikely that its purpose was to see how many figured out that they lived in a simulation. Perhaps just the opposite&#8212;if many did, maybe the world got erased, its original purpose corrupted.</p>

<p>So&#8230;he should prevent others from finding out. By not drawing attention to the ratcheting pine, to Glass Creek, to Mammoth Mountain at all. Not to himself, most of all.</p>

<p>Yes, and be interesting to the Programmer. Do things! <a id="page317"></a>Live in the moment. Enjoy life! It was a lot like Zen Buddhism.</p>

<p>Walking home, he watched Mammoth Mountain. It loomed large, gleaming firm and true in a sky as clear as logic. It felt solid, the air snapping with the rub and reek of reality. Where real people like him were, with complex inner thoughts, the Programmer spent the computational time to make the world work. Elsewhere, not. God had a budget.</p>

<p>But&#8230;how many other people had made this discovery, and kept quiet? All of them, apparently.</p>

<p>Or if they did try to shout the startling truth from the rooftops&#8230;Well then, something unpleasant happened.</p>

<p>The biggest discovery in history, throwing both religion and science into a cocked hat&#8230;and nobody dared speak its name. Nobody who survived, anyway.</p>

<p>Roger had to join them, the silents, for his own safety. Give up his Nobel.</p>

<p>He stopped at a wine shop and bought the best bottle they had.</p>
</body>
</html>
