From: IN%"skumar@cookeville.total-web.net"  "sabrina kumar"  2-DEC-1999 00:41:23.83
To:   IN%"skumar@cookeville.total-web.net"  "sabrina kumar",
IN%"eisenmenger@multipro.com"  "carol eisenmenger",
IN%"cbush5@bellsouth.net"  "catherine bush", IN%"cmccormick@tntech.edu"
"chris mccormick", IN%"drlight@mindspring.com"  "deanna light"
CC:
Subj: Quotes from UNDERCURRENTS by Martha Manning

hey, y'all...
i read this book.. uh... a while ago.  i actually sent these quotes when
i read the book, but some of you are new, and they've been banging
around in my head.  so - forgive me, and hit delete, if they're a rerun.
  this is the *funniest* book about depression that i've ever read.  the
author is a therapist who has had a low grade depression all her life
but becomes incapacitated by a biggie and eventually, if i remember
correctly, undergoes electric shock therapy.  i laughed, i cried, i was
really glad i read it.  it's in paperback now.  : )

"The fatigue gradient of doctoral students can be easily plotted by
measuring that portion of body mass that is positioned upright
approximately one hour into the cognitive marathons we call graduate
seminars. Today, the students are practically horizontal to the table.‚Äù

"The house is filthy. Every pile is a testament to good intentions gone
nowhere. Dark green garbage bags line the wall of the living room - old
clothes to be taken to the Salvation Army. They've been there so long,
we've started leaving our coats and backpacks on them like they are
innovative pieces of furniture. The county is going to be able to make a
major addition to its budget with the overdue fines on the pile of
library books by the door. Old potatoes are doing despicable things in
the broom closet, and what really worries me is that we're getting used
to the smell. I'd rather buy new underwear than tackle the mountain of
laundry molding in the basement. I'm wearing a pair of Brian's briefs.
Not even the designer kind with interesting colors and cuts, just the
plain white Fruit of the Looms. I'm worried that I'll be in a car
accident and people in the emergency room will think I'm a
cross-dresser. Yesterday all that was left in my underwear drawer was
this little black thing from Victoria's Secret that was clearly meant to
remain on the body for no more than ten minutes. All through student
advising, a three hour lecture on statistical reliability, and
interviews with prospective graduate students, I was constantly aware of
the presence of my underwear. I felt like I had a permanant wedgie. The
Fruit of the Looms today are a vast improvement."

"...But now I am labeled a hysterical woman. And the worst thing about
it is that I feel more humiliated than angry. It only lasts a few
minutes though, because by the time I reach the elevator, I decide that
the man is uniquely qualified to be a urologist, since he is such a
complete and total prick."

"We in mental health sometimes assume that because we have positive
intentions, our actions will automatically be positive and helpful. But
benign tyranny is no less oppressive than malevolent tyranny. On
psychiatric units the emphasis is on order and compliance. Patients
check their autonomy at the door. The routine application of all these
groups and activities therapies to all people on an acute-care,
high-turnover psychiatric unit is as ridiculous as prescribing the same
medicine or the same psychotherapy to every person. I imagine them
rounding up patients on the surgical wards, insisting that all people
who've just had their gallbladders removed participate in groups all
day, regardless of pain of their incisions or the drowsiness from their
medications. I imagine patients being required to act out their organ
loss in psychodrama and fashion images of their former gallbladders in
art therapy. I see them having to spill their proverbial guts in group
therapy, focusing on the events in their lives that influenced their
gallbladders to go bad. Whatever happened to the idea of a rest cure?
Sitting in the country on a porch allowing the warmth of the sunlight
and the wonder of nature to convince people to go on?"

She wants me to know the best thing I ever said to her. I scan my memory
for some great piece of wisdom I might have shared with her, but nothing
comes to mind.  She turns to me and says, "Remember when i called to
tell you the cancer came back? Remember what you said?"  I try hard to
remember, but I can't."  She continues, "You got really choked up and
then you said, 'This really sucks.'"  I wait for her to articulate
whatever brilliant insight I had shared. Then I realize that was it. All
of it. Years of training and experience in psychotherapy and "This
really sucks" had the most impact in months of work with this dying
woman? I feel foolish and inept. She opens her eyes, stares at me
through tears, and whispers, "And it really does, you know, it really
sucks."  All I can do is swallow hard, and stop fighting so hard not to
cry. I shake my head and agree, "It really does."

"It's the Catholic School Conversation. Attendance at Catholic school
before 1965 confers lifetime membership in an exclusive club, like the
Fraternal Order of Police. Despite differences in age, sex, financial
status, or location, the experience of having had your knuckles rapped
by ruler-toting women in black and white robes is a unifying force. No
matter where you are, this membership can be whipped out in social
emergencies when the conversation breaks down. We compare our school
experiences with those of our children, who, not surprisingly, attend
"public school." Brian recalls how we learned to utter the words "Public
school" with a combination of such contempt and pity for the poor
heathen children who attended them. We laugh about the perversity of so
much of what we learned: lurid descriptions and pictures of martyrs
being boiled in oil, saints having their tongues cut out, graphic,
sleep-robbing descriptions of the leper colonies of Father Damien, even
a recorded rendition of St. Maria Goretti, patroness of teenage girls,
complete with the heavy breathing of the man who attacks her, yelling
"Submit or die." And Maria, pinned beneath him, declaiming, "Death, but
not sin" which is precisely what she gets. One of the guys recalls that
the worst for him was a brown volume on the book shelf in his living room
called A DOCTOR AT CAVALRY. It was an excruciatingly detailed book about
the physiological parameters of Christ's crucifixion, setting the record
straight on such gruesome details as the actual placement of the nails -
not in the hands and feet, but the wrists and ankles, better for
holding. Christ's entire crucifixion, the spiritual bedrock of our
religion, is reduced to explicit and ridiculous medical trivia. In the
security of adulthood, we can laugh about that craziness without the
combination of rapt fascination and horror that we experienced as
impressionable Catholic children."

"Whoever said that the Sabbath was a day of rest was a fool. Unless, of
course, it was God or Christ or somebody, and then I take it back. But
it is Sunday afternoon and I'm exhausted. I'm becoming an over-achiever
at church.  We sleep through the alarm. I'm in the middle of a sexy
dream when Brian's knee bumps my ass as he scrambles out of bed yelling,
"Holy shit, we're late for church." We drag Keara out of bed, assess the
damage, and decide there's no time to shower or eat. The best we can do
is brush our teeth and throw on clothes. I can't find my plans for the
Sunday school class I'm teaching later and curse my head off about "the
people in this family who move my stuff." We race out the door. Brian
asks if I've had a chance to look in the mirror.  When I say no, Keara
laughs and tells me I have a bad case of "bed head." I look and see that
some of my very short hair is sticking straight up, giving me a look
that could be stylish and trendy on someone twenty years younger, but on
me just looks slobby and stupid. There's no time to wash my hair, so I
take a lot of heavy-duty hair spray, hold down the offending pieces, and
spray the hell out of them until they stay still. We are late for choir
practice and grab pieces of coffee cake on the way in. They are already
practicing a new song, which is unfortunate since I can't read music and
realize I will just have to sit next to one of the serious singers and
fake it. I don't belong in the choir. I have a lousy voice. But I love
the choir director, a fantastically talented man whose voice makes me
want to stand up and sing alleluia, something that rarely happens for me
in church. Between songs I surreptitiously devour pieces of coffee cake
and wonder whether I'll have time after practice to fine a soda machine
so I can get in my two hits of Diet Coke before mass begins. I know I'm
forgetting something. I see Maria, the liturgy coordinator, in the hall
and she checks in to make sure I have written the litany of prayers that
comes after the sermon. I try to look like I wrote them weeks ago and
tell her, "Oh yeah, I'm ready." I rush back to my seat with the choir
and rummage around in my backpack for paper and pencil so I can do a
blitz on the prayers. My backpack is so loaded with trash that the best
piece of paper I can find is a grocery store receipt. Luckily it was for
over two hundred dollars, so I have some space. How am I going to stand
up on that altar and read prayers from a roll of grocery tape? While the
priest introduces himself, I search for a pen as quietly as possible.
Brian looks over at me from the bass section with one of his "What the
hell are you doing?" expressions. I finally hit on what I think is a pen
and pull it out to use, only to find that it is really a pink,
plastic-covered tampon. Brian starts to laugh. I throw it back. The only
thing that writes is a brown crayon, which will have to do. I write some
prayers, inviting the congregation to pray for world peace, an end to
hatred and hunger, the usual stuff. We are a quarter of the way through
the service and I have yet to register a word of what is going on in the
mass.  When I finish the prayers I realize that I have to plan my Sunday
school class, which meets immediately afterward. So I start to obsess
about that, berating myself for being so disorganized."

 from UNDERCURRENTS, by Martha Manning


